Graph Causal Optimal Transport
and Wasserstein Distances
Jan Ob l´oj∗and Vlad Tuchilus, †
Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
August 17, 2026
Abstract
We study the graph causal optimal transport problem, a generalisation of the classi-
cal optimal transport problem in which the allowed couplings satisfy causal restrictions
prescribed by a directed graph. We characterise fully the directed acyclic graphs for
which the associated graph causal Wasserstein discrepancy is a metric and show that
the induced topology agrees with other natural adapted topologies. We characterise the
gluing properties of graph causal couplings, prove denseness of Monge couplings, and
obtain a dynamic programming principle which allows us to deduce when the graph
causal Wasserstein and the adapted Wasserstein distances are equal. Our results link
fundamental properties of graph causal optimal transport to structural properties of its
underlying graph. Complementing Cheridito and Eckstein (2025), who first introduced
such distances and established Lipschitz continuity for the average treatment effect in
structural causal models, we obtain Lipschitz continuity of the value function in stochas-
tic team problems.
1
Introduction
This paper offers a contribution at the crossroads of optimal transport, probability and
statistics. We define and study optimal transport (OT) problems where the marginals, and
their couplings, are constrained to be compatible with causality relations encoded via a
directed graph G. The associated graph causal couplings and Wasserstein distances were first
introduced by Cheridito and Eckstein (2025), who were inspired by the notion of causality
(Pearl, 2009a) in statistics and established Lipschitz continuity of average treatment effects
with respect to these distances. Such causal restrictions on marginals we consider arise in
graphical causal models, which are important objects across many fields of applications,
including medicine, law, economics and beyond.
However, apart from important special
subclasses of problems, as discussed below, general theoretical properties of graph causal
OT, including when and if the associated Wasserstein discrepancies are in fact distances,
remain open.
Our work addresses this key gap.
We establish fundamental properties of
graph causal OT problems and the induced Wasserstein distances.
Optimal transport methods offer a natural way to measure distances between probability
measures, one which generates the topology of weak convergence whilst being compatible with
∗jan.obloj@maths.ox.ac.uk
†vlad.tuchilus@maths.ox.ac.uk
1
arXiv:2608.13716v1  [math.PR]  13 Aug 2026


analytic and geometric analysis. OT theory offers rich and powerful insights into structural
properties of spaces of probability measures, their geodesics and gradient flows, as well as
how properties of their functionals reflect the geometry of the underlying state space, see
Villani (2003); Ambrosio et al. (2005); Villani (2009) for excellent exposition of these seminal
contributions. However, classical OT approaches are not well suited to distances between
laws of stochastic processes, where the information structure, often encoded via a filtration,
plays an important role. Over the years, many adapted topologies have been introduced to
address the inadequacy of the topology of weak convergence when dealing with processes.
The tools of optimal transport were also brought into the fray leading to the definition of
causal OT and so-called adapted Wasserstein distances, see Pflug (2009); Lassalle (2018);
Backhoff et al. (2017). Importantly, Backhoff-Veraguas et al. (2020b) proved that essentially
all of the proposed adapted topologies were equal, and adapted OT has become an active
field of research, with some results mirroring classical OT and others showcasing genuinely
novel challenges and types of results. Our work is inspired by this recent stream of results,
but offers a structurally much richer framework and, we believe, opens up new directions for
future studies and applications. Indeed, from the point of view of the theory we advance
here, classical OT corresponds to the special case of a fully connected graph and adapted
OT corresponds to the linear graph in which each node has incoming edges from all of its
ancestors. Naturally, there are many other graphs and varying the causality graph gives rise
to a wide range of intermediate problems, allowing us to ’interpolate’ between classical and
causal OT, and to generalise beyond them.
Broadly speaking, we show that the key properties of graph causal OT reflect the struc-
tural properties of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) defined in relation to absence or presence
of three basic local structures:
• a chain of three or more nodes in a linear sequence;
• a split, also known as an unshielded fork;
• and a merge, also known as a v-structure, an immorality or an unshielded collider;
see Definition 2.1, and Figure 1.1 for a graphical representation. We show that, in general,
i
j
k
Chain
i
j
k
Split
j
k
i
Merge
Figure 1.1: Three important local structures arising in DAGs.
the graph causal Wasserstein discrepancy is a distance for a DAG G essentially if and only if
G does not have a chain. And for G with a chain, the natural way to define the associated
distance is to consider the distance generated by G, the transitive closure of G, i.e., the graph
G with added edges i →k for any chain i →j →k in G. In addition, for a DAG G with no
chains, its set of bicausal couplings is weakly closed, as well as closed under gluing, if and only
if G has no splits. In this case, the sets of bicausal couplings and lifted bicausal couplings,
as introduced below, are also equal. Finally, in a natural setting of an additive cost across
2


the nodes, graph causal Wasserstein distances are equal to the adapted Wasserstein distance,
essentially if and only if G is a perfect DAG, i.e., a DAG with no merges.
Graph causal Wasserstein distances. Cheridito and Eckstein (2025) introduced graph
causal Wasserstein discrepancies WG,p and used these objects but did not prove if, or when,
these were distances. Indeed, they provided a numerical example to show that the triangle
inequality may fail even for a simple graph made of a single chain of three nodes. In Theorem
3.2, we establish that the graph causal OT problem associated with a directed acyclic graph
G defines a genuine distance WG,p on the subspace of G-compatible measures if and only if
G is transitively closed, i.e., all of a node’s ancestors are its parents. We further show that
WG,p are both natural for applications, e.g., stochastic team games are Lipschitz continuous,
see Theorem 3.5, and that they generate the natural topology: the subspace topology of the
adapted weak topology, see Theorem 3.8. Finally, our subsequent results, discussed below,
suggest a modified definition of the G-causal Wasserstein metric,̃ WG,p, which is always a
distance. We show that in fact̃ WG,p = WG,p, where G is the transitive closure of G. In
particular,̃ WG,p = WG,p when G is transitively closed, and̃ WG,p is, in some sense, the
minimal object that cures the deficiency of WG,p.
Graph causal OT problem and bicausal couplings. Our next set of results focuses
on the graph causal OT problem, as well as the spaces of G-compatible measures PG (X), see
Definition 2.3, and G-(bi)causal couplings. The sets PG (X) arise naturally in probabilistic
graphical models, see Lauritzen (2026), where G-compatibility is known as the local Markov
property, and different characterisations of them are well known, see Proposition 4.1. We note
that throughout, we work on general Polish product spaces and impose neither a joint-density
nor a strict-positivity assumptions often encountered in graphical-model results. Interestingly,
even some basic properties of PG (X) were open, such as when the set is weakly closed, and are
among structural results we contribute to the field, see Proposition 4.13. Our first main result
in this context concerns the key property of admissible (i.e., G-causal) couplings: in Theorem
4.11 we show that the gluing of two couplings is still admissible if and only if G is transitively
closed and has no splits. This is a novel research direction that arises in graph causal OT.
It is linked to the study of conditional independence structures via semigraphoid properties
(Studen´y, 2005). In contrast, variants of the gluing lemma have typically been available in the
other OT settings, see (Villani, 2003, Lemma 7.6) for classical OT, (Eckstein and Pammer,
2024, Lemma 3.1) for causal OT, (Acciaio et al., 2025, Lemma A.5) for multicausal OT,
and imply quick and direct proofs of the triangle inequality for their associated Wasserstein
distances. To our knowledge, this is the first natural OT setting in which the relevant gluing
property can fail while the associated discrepancy still satisfies the triangle inequality.
Our second main result here, Theorem 4.18, shows that, under a suitable continuity as-
sumption (i.e., absence of atoms) on the measures, plans generated by G-biadapted Monge
maps, our equivalent of Monge maps in OT (Monge, 1781), are dense in G-bicausal cou-
plings. This mirrors the classical OT results of Pratelli (2007) and we were guided by the
recent analogue for the adapted OT in Beiglb¨ock et al. (2025).
Their approach involves
viewing bicausal couplings as projections of deterministic couplings induced by biadapted
Monge maps on an enlarged or lifted space, where the new randomness in non-deterministic
couplings is made explicit. We follow the same approach and define our set of couplings as
the projections of couplings induced by G-biadapted Monge maps on a lifted space. Our
key results, Theorems 4.21 and 4.22, characterise precisely the relations between these sets
of different couplings and, in particular, show that G-causal OT problems defined using reg-
ular or lifted couplings are equivalent. This is a stepping stone for our proof of the metric
property in Theorem 3.2, where we can exploit the fact that compositions of G-biadapted
Monge maps are G-biadapted when G is transitively closed. These results also suggest the
3


alternative definition of the G-causal Wasserstein metric,̃ WG,p mentioned above, which uses
lifted bicausal couplings.
Dynamic programming principle and relation to AWp.
Our third set of main
results focuses on characterising directed acyclic graphs G for which WG,p = AWp, the graph
causal and adapted Wasserstein distances coincide. As we always have WG,p ≥AWp, this
reduces to understanding when adding the extra causal relations to transform graph G into
a linear one adds no advantage for marginals in PG (X). We show that the relevant notion
is one already known in the probabilistic graphical models literature and require G to be
a perfect DAG, i.e., that it has no merges. For such graphs, and for costs which are G-
separable, see (9), the G-causal OT problem can be computed via an iterative procedure,
i.e., it satisfies a dynamic programming principle, see Proposition 5.3. This, in turn, allows
one to build an isometric embedding into a certain (classical) Wasserstein space of nested
probability measures. The equality WG,p = AWp, and hence also WG,p =̃ WG,p = AWp, then
follows from analogous embeddings for the latter in Backhoff-Veraguas et al. (2020c); Bartl
et al. (2024), see Theorems 5.4 and 6.23.
Related literature and outlook. Graphical causal models (GCMs) are a large and
active field of study. In many fields of applications, from medicine Greenland et al. (1999);
Hern´an et al. (2000), through law Chockler and Halpern (2004); Halpern and Pearl (2005);
Halpern (2015), to many applications of causal inference in psychology, sociology or political
science, see Hern´an and Robins (2020), structural causal models define how joint distributions
arise and these specific representations map onto a qualitative representation as a GCM. We
refer to Pearl (2009a) and the references therein for a broad overview, to Morgan and Winship
(2007) for a point of view linking with classical data analysis and statistics tools, and to Peters
et al. (2017) for links with machine learning and data-driven causal discovery. All of these
provide fundamental motivation to study the spaces of G-compatible measures, PG (X), for
different directed acyclic graphs G, and to understand and quantify continuity of natural
operations and optimisation problems over such spaces.
Such questions in the context of laws of stochastic processes and their optimisation prob-
lems inspired Pflug and Pichler (2012) and the literature on adapted Wasserstein distances.
A stream of works established these as the right tools to capture continuity of multistage
stochastic optimisation (Pflug and Pichler, 2014), optimal stopping (Backhoff-Veraguas et al.,
2020b), and utility maximisation (Backhoff-Veraguas et al., 2020a). Similarly, the do operator
and continuity of the average treatment effect, were behind the original work of Cheridito and
Eckstein (2025), who introduced G-causal Wasserstein distances. And whilst we show in this
paper that for this particular problem AW1 is in fact sufficient, the original intuition is vindi-
cated by our results in Section 3.2, and WG,1 turn out to be the right tool to study continuity
of optimisation problems over PG (X). More broadly, we believe the results discussed so far
offer synergies with existing approaches and open up natural directions for future research.
We sketch now some examples.
Distributionally robust optimisation Rahimian and Mehrotra (2022) with Wasserstein
distances offers a powerful and tractable tool to robustify optimisation or learning tasks,
e.g., Mohajerin Esfahani and Kuhn (2018); Blanchet and Murthy (2019); Gao (2023); Bui
et al. (2022), and quantify sensitivity to model uncertainty Bartl et al. (2021); Nendel and
Sgarabottolo (2026). Such applications have recently also been extended to the context of
adapted Wasserstein distances, see Bartl and Wiesel (2023); Fuhrmann et al. (2023); Jiang
and Ob l´oj (2024). Similar questions for structural causal models, and causal discovery, are
open.
With the right distances now to hand, we have a clearer path to approach such
problems, even if they can still prove to be very challenging.
Numerical approaches for OT problems, see Peyr´e and Cuturi (2019), often go via entropic
4


regularisation. Similar ideas have been fruitful also in other contexts, such as the recent work
on the Gromov-Wasserstein OT setup in Zhang et al. (2024), or for adapted OT in Eckstein
and Pammer (2024). Apart from numerical algorithms, these papers often study the relevant
entropic OT problem, an interesting mathematical question in its own right, see L´eonard
(2014).
Defining and studying entropic version of the graph causal OT problem appears
as a natural open problem to us. Likewise, motivated by the contributions on Wasserstein
barycentres going back to Agueh and Carlier (2011), averaging over SCMs, i.e., computing
graph causal barycentres of a family of elements in PG (X), is a very natural problem with
many potential applications.
We plan to study these questions in subsequent works and
note that the first step in this direction was already taken in (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025,
Section 4.3) who considered graph causal interpolation between two measures in PG (X).
Throughout this paper, we use ‘causal’ to refer to dependence constraints encoded via a
directed graph G which is assumed fixed. However, several of our results involved comparing
graph causal OT, or WG,p, for different graphs, such as when considering the transitive
closure of G, or when showing WG,p = AWp. This relates more broadly to the theory of
causal abstraction (Rubenstein et al., 2017) which considers relations between two SCMs
representing the same system at different levels of granularity. These questions are important,
in particular, across sub-fields of AI and relate to surrogate models, aggregation of information
and transfer learning. Felekis et al. (2024) used a multi-marginal OT approach to learn causal
abstraction maps from data. We believe that our results could offer novel tools towards such
applications.
Organisation. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. We begin by establishing
notation. In Section 3 we present our main results on graph causal Wasserstein distances. We
next consider the graph causal OT problem more generally in Section 4. This includes differ-
ent characterisations of G-compatibility and G-bicausality, analysis of the gluing property for
couplings, denseness of Monge couplings, the key relaxation of lifted graph bicausality, as well
as a short discussion of duality. Section 5 is devoted to establishing the dynamic program-
ming principle and characterising when graph causal Wasserstein and adapted Wasserstein
distances are equal. Section 6 then contains proofs. Our decision to assemble the proofs
separately from the earlier presentation of the main results is motivated by the logic of ar-
guments. Sections 3–5 present our main results in what we feel is a natural logical flow to
discover them, but it is not one that can be adopted for the proofs where, for example, lifted
bicausal couplings and Theorem 4.21 are key in showing the distance property in Theorem
3.2. Importantly, we start the proofs with Section 6.1, where we present several important
examples and counterexamples. Further examples are provided throughout the proofs – most
of our results are characterisations and for each of them we build explicit examples to show
that the statements fail when one of the assumptions is dropped. Appendix A contains some
technical, measure-theoretic results, Appendix B some technical results needed in the proof
of Proposition 4.13 on weak closure properties of graph compatible measures, and finally
Appendix C further technical lemmata related to the generalised graph causal Wasserstein
distances and the proof of Proposition 4.28.
2
Graph Compatible Measures and Couplings
2.1
Notation
For random variables A,B,C defined on the same probability space, A ⊥⊥
B C means that A
and C are conditionally independent given B. We will study probability measures which
5


satisfy conditional independence relations induced by directed graphs of the form G = (V,E),
consisting of a finite set of vertices V and a set of directed edges E ⊆{(i,j) ∈V × V ∣i ≠j}.
Vertex labels play no role and, unless stated otherwise, we will assume V = {1,2,...,n} for
some n ≥1. For i ∈V we denote the set of parents of node i by pai ∶= {j ∈V ∣(j,i) ∈E}. We
define inductively on k ≥1 the set of k-ancestors of node i by pa1
i ∶= pai and for all k ≥1,
pak+1
i
∶= ⋃j∈pak
i paj. Finally, we define the set of ancestors of node i by ani ∶= ⋃k≥1 pak
i and
the set of descendants of i by dsci ∶= {j ∈V ∶i ∈anj}. For A ⊆V , we write paA ∶= ⋃i∈A pai.
Graph inclusion G1 ⊆G2 simply means that V1 ⊆V2 and E1 ⊆E2, where Gi = (Vi,Ei) i = 1,2.
In contrast, we say that G1 is a proper subgraph of G2 when V1 ⊆V2 and E1 = E2 ∩V1 × V1.
A directed graph G is called cyclic if there exists i ∈V such that i ∈ani. If no such vertex
exists, G is a directed acyclic graph (DAG). We say that a DAG is sorted, or topologically
ordered, if i < j whenever i ∈paj. We say a directed graph G′ = (V ′,E′) is a relabelling
of G = (V,E) if there exists a bijection λ ∶V →V ′ such that (i,j) ∈E if and only if
(λ(i),λ(j)) ∈E′. Relabelling is an equivalence relation on directed graphs and we often
choose a suitable relabelling G′ instead of G. In particular, a DAG can always be relabelled
so that it is sorted and hence, without loss of generality, we will mostly work with sorted
DAGs.
Definition 2.1. Let G = (V,E) be a directed graph and i,j,k ∈V .
• If j ∈pak and i ∈paj but i ∉pak we call the triplet (i,j,k) a chain. If no such triplet
exists, we say G is transitively closed.
• If i ∈paj ∩pak but j ∉pak and k ∉paj, we call the triplet (i,j,k) a split. If no such
triplet exists, we say G contains no splits.
• If j ∈pai and k ∈pai but j ∉pak and k ∉paj, we call the triplet (i,j,k) a merge. If no
such triplet exists, we say G is perfect.
Remark 2.2. In probabilistic terms, a chain represents the information flow of a Markov
process. Note that G is transitively closed if whenever i,j,k ∈V are such that i ∈paj and
j ∈pak then i ∈pak. Given a DAG, we can consider its transitive closure, see Definition 4.27.
A split is also known as a unshielded fork and a merge as a v-structure, an immorality or an
unshielded collider, see Sections 5 and 6.8 for related discussion and equivalent characterisa-
tions.
Given a directed graph G = (V,E), we will associate to each v ∈V Polish spaces Xv, Yv,
Zv. We write X ∶= ∏v∈V Xv, and for A ⊆V , XA ∶= ∏v∈A Xv, with analogous notions for Y,Z.
Throughout, when G is given we tacitly assume that X,Y,Z are given as well. For A ⊆V
and random variables X with state space X we write XA for their projection on XA and for
1 ≤a ≤b ≤n, we use the shorthand a ∶b to mean the set [a,b] ∩N. As noted, we mostly take
V = {1,2,...,n} = 1 ∶n and then X = X1 × ... × Xn.
For a Polish space Ω, dΩdenotes its metric, and P (Ω) denotes the set of Borel probability
measures on Ω. For p ≥1, Pp (Ω) is the subset of µ ∈P (Ω) such that ∫dΩ(x,x0)p dµ(x) < ∞
for some x0 ∈Ω. For two Polish spaces Ω1,Ω2, we denote by projΩ1 ∶Ω1 × Ω2 →Ω1 the
projection map (x,y) ↦x. For µ ∈P (Ω1) and a measurable map T ∶Ω1 →Ω2, T #µ ∈P (Ω2)
denotes the pushforward of µ through T. For µi ∈P (Ωi), i = 1,2, we will write Π(µ1,µ2) =
{π ∈P (Ω1 × Ω2)∣projΩi#π = µi,i = 1,2} for the set of couplings of µ1 and µ2.
2.2
Bayesian Networks and Their Couplings
Consider the joint distribution µ of an n-tuple of random variables X = (X1,...,Xn) which
respects the causality relations encoded by a DAG G: each Xi is conditionally independent
6


of its non-descendants given its parents. Such objects naturally arise in the causal inference
literature as the measures induced by structural causal models (SCM) (Pearl, 2009b), and
are also called Bayesian networks, although that name is more often associated with the
couple (µ,G). More generally, such objects are also known as probabilistic graphical models,
and different definitions are used in the literature, often assuming joint density exists, see
Section 4 for further discussion and equivalence results, and Lauritzen (2026) for a broader
perspective. Our focus is on µ,G given, as opposed to designed, and we simply speak of their
compatibility.
Definition 2.3 (G-compatible measures). Let G be a DAG. A measure µ ∈P (X) is called
G-compatible if when X ∼µ, the following conditional independence relations hold:
Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
XV ∖(dsci∪{i}),
i ∈V.
We denote by PG (X) the set of all such G-compatible measures, and for p ≥1, PG
p (X) ∶=
PG (X) ∩Pp (X).
The above compatibility notion is also known as the local Markov property. It is fur-
ther equivalent to G-separation implying conditional independence, also known as the global
Markov property. Both definitions are invariant under relabelling of vertices. When we take
a topologically ordered labelling, i.e., when G is a sorted DAG, they are further equivalent to
Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
X1∶i−1,
2 ≤i ≤n,
see (Lauritzen, 2026, Theorem 4.32) and Proposition 4.1 below which summarises these re-
lations. The notion of G-compatibility and its equivalent reformulations are well studied in
the causal statistics literature and remain an active field of research, e.g., with extensions
to models with cycles and latent variables as in Bongers et al. (2021). Nevertheless, to the
best of our knowledge, some basic properties of PG (X) remain open and our work provides
some novel contributions. In particular, we provide a full characterisation of DAGs for which
PG (X) is weakly closed, see Proposition 4.13, complementing the partial results in (Cheridito
and Eckstein, 2025, Proposition 3.3).
To define a transport distance between two G-compatible measures, we need to consider
their couplings and understand what are the causal restrictions they need to satisfy. The
central notion of graph (bi)causal couplings was first introduced by Cheridito and Eckstein
(2025) and we undertake their comprehensive study, necessary to characterise and understand
their induced Wasserstein distances. We start with a new definition here, aligned in spirit
with ideas from Bayesian networks and causal statistics.
Definition 2.4 (Graph (bi)causal couplings for DAGs). Suppose G is a DAG, µ ∈PG (X)
and ν ∈PG (Y), the set of their G-causal couplings is given as
Πc
G (µ,ν) ∶= Π(µ,ν) ∩PGc (X × Y),
where Gc = (V c,Ec) is the graph made of G and its copy G′ with additional edges linking
i ∈V (associated to Xi) and its parents to its copy i′ in V ′ (associated to Yi):
V c = {i,i′ ∶i ∈V },
Ec = {(i,j),(i,j′),(i′,j′) ∶(i,j) ∈E} ∪{(i,i′) ∶i ∈V }.
Moreover, we define the set of G-anticausal couplings Πac
G (µ,ν) to be the set of measures
in Π(µ,ν) whose pushforward under the map (x,y) ↦(y,x) is in Πc
G (ν,µ), and the set of
G-bicausal couplings Πbc
G (µ,ν) ∶= Πc
G (µ,ν) ∩Πac
G (µ,ν).
7


1
2
3
G
1
2
3
1′
2′
3′
Gc
G′
G
Figure 2.1: An example of the construction of Gc for the DAG G with vertex set {1,2,3}
and edge set {(1,2),(1,3)}, shown on the left. Gc is shown on the right, and the two copies
G and G′ of the original DAG in Gc are highlighted. The spaces X1,X2,X3 are associated to
the nodes 1, 2, 3, while the spaces Y1,Y2,Y3 are associated to the nodes 1′, 2′, 3′.
We show that Πbc
G (µ,ν) is non-empty and discuss a number of equivalent characterisations
of graph bicausal couplings in Section 4, as well as its extensions to directed (potentially
cyclical) graphs, see Definition 4.3. In particular, in Proposition 4.7, we show that when G is
a sorted DAG then π ∈Π(µ,ν) is G-causal if and only if when (X,Y ) ∼π, then the following
conditional independence relations hold:
Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xpai,Ypai
(X,Y1∶i−1),
1 ≤i ≤n.
We typically work with this characterisation and can do so without any loss of generality
since, given a DAG, we may always choose a relabelling of its vertices such that it becomes
a sorted DAG with vertex set of the form {1,2,...,n} and, as noted above, G-compatibility,
and hence also G-(bi)causality, is invariant under relabelling.
3
Graph Causal Wasserstein Distances
3.1
Metric Property
Graph bicausal couplings naturally induce the following variant of the Wasserstein distance:
Definition 3.1 (Graph causal Wasserstein distances). Let G be a directed graph and p ≥1.
The pth order G-causal Wasserstein distance between µ,ν ∈PG
p (X) is given by
WG,p(µ,ν)p ∶=
inf
π∈Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫dX (x,y)p dπ(x,y).
(1)
This object was originally proposed in Cheridito and Eckstein (2025). It is immediate that
WG,p satisfies two of the three properties of a metric: symmetry (WG,p(µ,ν) = WG,p(ν,µ))
and positivity (WG,p(µ,ν) ≥0, with equality if and only if µ = ν). The former follows from the
purposefully symmetrical definition of Πbc
G (µ,ν), and the second from dX being a distance and
the fact that the identity coupling is always graph bicausal. In contrast, the third property,
the triangle inequality, was left open by Cheridito and Eckstein (2025) who only provide a
numerical counterexample showing that the triangle inequality does not generally hold for
the single chain graph Gchain, with vertex set {1,2,3} and edge set {(1,2),(2,3)}.
Our first main result proves that the triangle inequality does hold for a large class of
DAGs and hence WG,p is a metric.
Theorem 3.2. Let G be a transitively closed DAG. Then WG,p is a metric on PG
p (X).
Conversely, if G is a DAG which is not transitively closed, then there is a choice of (X,dX )
for which WG,p does not satisfy the triangle inequality on PG
p (X).
8


The first part of the above theorem is a positive statement. Together with the result
presented in the next sections, these offer a cornerstone for a new field of graph causal
optimal transport and, we believe, open up exciting avenues for future research, some of
which we outlined already above.
The second part of the statement shows the limitations of Definition 3.1. Example 6.1
gives an explicit counterexample where the triangle inequality fails for Gchain, complementing
the numerical results of Cheridito and Eckstein (2025). The converse statement then follows
exploiting the fact that if G is not transitively closed, then it has Gchain as a proper subgraph.
The proof of the first part of Theorem 3.2 requires us to introduce G-bicausal couplings on
a lifted space. Whilst their definition may appear technical at first, it lead to the modified
Definition 4.26, of lifted G-causal Wasserstein distances̃ WG,p, which are always a metric and
which agree with WG,p for transitively closed DAGs. In fact, they correspond to WG,p, where
G is the (transitive) closure of G, see Proposition 4.28 and the discussion which precedes it.
Important classes of graphs G allow us to recover known transport distances. First, when
G corresponds to the linear information structure, i.e., each node has all earlier nodes as
its parents, G = Gn ∶= (1 ∶n,{(i,j)∣1 ≤i < j ≤n}), Gn-causality is equivalent to Yi
⊥⊥
X1∶i,Y1∶i−1
(X,Y1∶i−1) for all i ∈V , which by the chain rule of conditional independence (Kallenberg,
2021, Theorem 8.12), is equivalent to Y1∶i ⊥⊥
X1∶i X for all i ∈V . Informally speaking: the past
of Y only depends on X through its past. This is precisely the notion of a causal coupling from
causal OT (Lassalle, 2018; Backhoff et al., 2017), all marginals are Gn-compatible, PGn
p
(X) =
Pp (X), and we recover the adapted, or bicausal, Wasserstein distance WGn,p = AWp. Second,
when G is a fully connected graph, pai = V ∖{i} for all i ∈V , extending current definitions to
allow for cyclic graphs, see Definition 4.3, WG,p reduces to the classical Wasserstein distance.
Third, a graph G with no edges results in a distance analogous to the Gromov-Wasserstein
distance, see Section 4.5. We refer to (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Section 2.4) for a detailed
discussion. In these classical examples, it is relatively easy to establish the triangle inequality,
and hence the distance property, using the so-called gluing lemma: constructing a π ∈Π(µ,η)
from π1 ∈Π(µ,ν),π2 ∈Π(ν,η) by disintegrating and joining along the common marginal.
This natural strategy does not generalise to general DAGs: the gluing property only holds
for transitively closed DAGs with no splits, see Theorem 4.11 and the discussion in Section
4.2.
The proof of Theorem 3.2 is presented in Section 6.3.
Since we can not simply rely
on a gluing lemma, its strategy is to consider a lifted space, which allows for additional
independent randomisations at each node. We show that G-bicausal couplings are projections
of Monge couplings (i.e., couplings supported on the graph of a function) on the lifted space.
Furthermore, such projections are essentially convex combinations of elements in Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Since Monge couplings are easy to glue (by composing their associated functions) these results
allow us to establish the desired triangle inequality. These, and other, structural properties
of G-bicausal couplings are discussed in Section 4.
3.2
First Applications
In the context of stochastic optimisation problems, G-compatible measures arise as the state
distributions in stochastic team problems with information sets which do not necessarily
increase (Y¨uksel and Ba¸sar, 2024). We establish Lipschitz continuity of their value function
with respect to WG,1, which provides a foundational motivation for these distances. We are
inspired by the results of Pflug and Pichler (2014, Theorem 6.4, Corollary 6.7) on continuity of
multistage stochastic optimisation problems with respect to the adapted Wasserstein distance.
9


Stochastic Team Problems
Consider a sorted and transitively closed DAG G with V = {1,...,n}, and a system with
stochastic state described by the random variable X = (X1,...,Xn) ∶= IdX such that µ ∶=
L(X) ∈PG (X1∶n).
A collection of n decision makers (DMs) must choose actions α =
(α1,...,αn) in a closed cylinder set A ∶= ∏n
k=1 Ak ⊆Rn in such a way that the action of
the kth decision maker, αk ∈Ak only uses the information available by observing Xk,Xpak
i.e., αk must be σ(Xk,Xpak)-measurable. We write α◁GX for this set of so-called G-adapted
actions. Note that for α ◁G X, there exist measurable functions Hk ∶Xk × Xpak →R such
that αk = Hk(Xk,Xpak). The (shared) goal of the DMs is to minimise the expectation of a
given loss function Q ∶X × A →[0,∞). We thus want to solve
v(µ) ∶=
inf
α∈A,α◁GX Eµ [Q(X,α)],
(2)
where we have written Eµ to emphasize the fact that L(X) = µ.
Remark 3.3. In the case of a linear information structure G = Gn, α ◁G X reduces to the
requirement that α is adapted to the canonical filtration generated by X i.e., α ◁X. In
this case, the DMs have non-decreasing information sets and can be viewed as the series of
consecutive decisions by a central actor who accumulates the information. We thus recover
the classical multistage stochastic optimisation problem, and the setting of Pflug and Pichler
(2014).
Remark 3.4. Since G is transitively closed, the relation i ∈paj induces a partial order on
V , which we denote by ≤G. For a series of m ≥1 decision makers with labels k1 ≤G ... ≤G km,
their information sets Fki ∶= σ(Xki,Xpaki) then form a filtration Fk1 ⊆... ⊆Fkm. We are
thus in the setting of a quasi-classical team game Y¨uksel and Ba¸sar (2024), i.e., one with
partially nested information sets.
The following result, whose proof is presented in Section 6.9, establishes the desired
Lipschitz continuity with respect to WG,1. It is complemented by Example 3.13 which shows
that, in general, Lipschitz continuity does not hold in adapted Wasserstein distance.
Theorem 3.5. Suppose A ⊆Rn is compact and convex, that the map α ↦Q(x,α) is convex
for all x ∈X, and that ∣Q(x,α) −Q(y,α)∣≤LdX (x,y) for all α ∈A for some L > 0. Then
∣v(µ) −v(ν)∣≤L ⋅WG,1(µ,ν), ∀µ,ν ∈PG
1 (X).
Average Treatment Effect
As a second application, we recall the result from Cheridito and Eckstein (2025), which showed
that the average treatment effect in causal statistics, see Pearl (2009a), is WG,1-Lipschitz.
Assume that for vertices j < k in a sorted DAG G = (1 ∶n,E), Xj ∈Xj = {0,1} encodes
whether a treatment is applied or not (or, in non-medical terms, whether an intervention is
done or not), and Xk ∈Xk encodes the outcome for some target variable. We assume Xk is a
compact subset of R, that dXi(xi,yi) = ∣xi −yi∣for i = j,k, and that dX = ∑n
i=1 dXi(xi,yi).
If the true data-generating distribution is given by some causal model (µ,G) with µ ∈
PG (X), then the average effect of applying the treatment, expressed in Pearl’s do-notation
(Pearl, 2009a), can be identified from µ via the back-door adjustment (Pearl, 2009a, Theorem
3.3.2) as
∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣do(xj = 1)) = ∫Xpaj ∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣xj = 1,xpaj)µ(dxpaj).
10


Replacing 1 with 0 above yields the formula for the average effect of not applying the
treatment. The average treatment effect (ATE) is then defined as
ψµ,G ∶= ∣∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣do(xj = 1)) −∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣do(xj = 0))∣.
(3)
Consider the situation that we were right about the causal graph G but might have
misestimated our model µ. We restrict our class of possible models to those satisfying δ ≤
µ(xj = 1∣xpaj) ≤1 −δ for µ-almost all xpaj for some fixed δ > 0, the set of which is denoted
by PG,δ (X). Then the following result controls the impact of our misestimation on the ATE
via the WG,1 distance:
Proposition 3.6 (Cheridito and Eckstein (2025), Proposition 4.4). Under the assumptions
above, there exists a constant L > 0 such that
∣ψµ,G −ψν,G∣≤L ⋅WG,1(µ,ν), ∀µ,ν ∈PG,δ (X).
Whilst the above result motivated Cheridito and Eckstein (2025) to introduce WG,1,
the nature of the average treatment effect is such that adding additional causal relations
does not necessarily change the quantity in (3).
In consequence, and in contrast to the
setting of Theorem 3.5 above, the Lipschitz continuity also holds with respect to the adapted
Wasserstein distance AW1. More generally, we have the following result.
Corollary 3.7. Let the assumptions above hold, and let G′ = (1 ∶n,E′) be another sorted
DAG such that E ⊆E′. Then, there exists a constant L > 0 such that
∣ψµ,G −ψν,G∣≤L ⋅WG′,1(µ,ν), ∀µ,ν ∈PG,δ (X).
In particular, there exists a constant L > 0 such that
∣ψµ,G −ψν,G∣≤L ⋅AW1(µ,ν), ∀µ,ν ∈PG,δ (X).
Proof. The result follows from Proposition 3.6 if we show that PG,δ (X) ⊆PG′,δ (X) and
that ψµ,G = ψµ,G′ for all µ ∈PG,δ (X). This is shown in Lemma 6.26 and is essentially a
consequence of the back-door adjustment (Pearl, 2009a, Theorem 3.3.2). The final conclusion
follows by taking G′ to be the graph Gn = (1 ∶n,{(i,j)∣1 ≤i < j ≤n}), for which by definition
WGn,1 = AW1.
In a recent work, Visentin and Cheridito (2025) considered WG,1 in the context of con-
tinuity of causal optimisation problems. Whilst we believe that analogous remarks as above
should apply also to this work, i.e., one could use AW1 instead of WG,1, we note that their
proposed graph-causal data augmentation techniques are of independent interest.
3.3
Topological Properties
We now investigate the topology induced by graph causal Wasserstein distances.
Fix a
transitively closed DAG G and p ≥1. In this section, we also fix on our product X = ∏n
i=1 Xi
of Polish spaces (Xi,di) the metric d given by d(x,y)p = ∑n
i=1 di(xi,yi)p. We recall that the
adapted weak topology on Pp (X) is induced by the adapted Wasserstein distance AWp =
WGn,p.
Theorem 3.8. The topology induced by WG,p on PG
p (X) is the subspace topology on PG
p (X)
of the adapted weak topology on Pp (X).
11


The proof is deferred to Section 6.4. We recall that the adapted Wasserstein topology was
studied extensively, e.g., in Backhoff-Veraguas et al. (2020b), Bartl et al. (2024), Pammer
(2024). In particular, in the first of these papers, the authors obtained the seminal result that
this, and many other natural adapted topologies, including Aldous (1981)’s extended weak
topology, or Hellwig (1996)’s information topology, were all equal. The above theorem thus
asserts the same principle: there is just one natural adapted topology and it is recovered by
graph causal Wasserstein distances. The intuition behind this potentially surprising result
is that at infinitesimal scales, couplings constructed from myopic one-step choices are nearly
optimal, see Remark 3.9. Note however that while AWp and WG,p are equivalent on PG
p (X),
they are not uniformly equivalent, see Example 3.10, and stochastic team games covered in
Theorem 3.5 are not Lipschitz continuous with respect to the adapted Wasserstein distance,
see Example 3.13.
Remark 3.9. In order to compute AW1(µ,ν) for µ,ν ∈P (X), one chooses for each step
1 ≤i ≤n couplings of disintegrations πx1∶i−1,y1∶i−1
i
∈Π(µx1∶i−1
i
,νy1∶i−1
i
) in such a way that if
π(dx,dy) = ⊗n
i=1 πx1∶i−1,y1∶i−1
i
(dxi,dyi), then ∫∑n
i=1 di(xi,yi)dπ(x,y) is as small as possible.
A naive attempt to achieve this would be to build the coupling in a myopic fashion:
choose each πx1∶i−1,y1∶i−1
i
such that ∫di(xi,yi)dπx1∶i−1,y1∶i−1
i
(xi,yi) = W1(µx1∶i−1
i
,νy1∶i−1
i
). This
choice would result in a bicausal coupling, but one that is unlikely to be optimal. Indeed,
the optimal choice is to pick πx1∶i−1,y1∶i−1
i
such that it minimises
∫di(xi,yi) + AW1(µx1∶i
i+1∶n,νy1∶i
i+1∶n)dπx1∶i−1,y1∶i−1
i
(xi,yi),
thus taking into account the effect of our choice at time i on the optimisation problems
for times j > i, in a dynamic programming fashion. For myopic couplings, the errors can
compound exponentially in the number of time steps.
However, at infinitesimal scales, when AW1(µ(m),ν) →0 as m →∞, the myopic couplings
are not far from optimal, as the extra dynamic programming errors converge to zero (because
of the finite number of time steps).
Indeed, an equivalent topology, Hellwig’s (reduced)
information topology (Hellwig, 1996), is the initial topology of the maps
µ ∈P (X) ↦LX∼µ (X1,...,Xi−1,L(Xi ∣X1,...,Xi−1)) ∈P (X1∶i−1 × P (Xi)),
for 1 ≤i ≤n. Thus, we can focus only on the next step conditional distributions. In our case,
when µ,ν ∈PG (X), the set of couplings Π(µx1∶i−1
i
,νy1∶i−1
i
) is in fact equal to Π(µ
xpai
i
,ν
ypai
i
),
and thus we can build myopic G-bicausal couplings by choosing π
xpai,ypai
i
∈Π(µ
xpai
i
,ν
ypai
i
)
that keep ∫di(xi,yi)dπ
xpai,ypai
i
(xi,yi) minimal. The proof of Theorem 3.8 shows that at
small scales such myopic constructions converge to the optimum. A more general discussion
of dynamic programming results for WG,p is presented in Section 5.
Example 3.10 (Not uniformly equivalent). While AWp ≤WG,p, there does not in general
exist a constant C > 0 such that AWp ≥C ⋅WG,p, as shown below.
For Gmerge, the graph with vertex set {1,2,3} and edge set {(1,3),(2,3)}, let for ε > 0
µ(ε) ∶= 1
4 (δ(ε,ε,1) + δ(ε,−ε,−1) + δ(−ε,ε,−1) + δ(−ε,−ε,1)) ∈PGmerge (R3),
ν(ε) ∶= 1
2 (δ(0,ε,1) + δ(0,−ε,−1)) ∈PGmerge (R3).
Then, taking the transference plan induced by the Monge map
((−1)jε,(−1)kε,(−1)j+k) ↦(0,(−1)j+kε,(−1)j+k), ∀j,k ∈{0,1},
12


one sees that AWp(µ(ε),ν(ε))p ≤εp + 1
2(2ε)p ↘0 as ε ↘0.
However, any Gmerge-bicausal coupling π(ε) of µ(ε),ν(ε) will have π(ε)(X3 ≠Y3) = 1
2 and
thus WG,p(µ(ε),ν(ε))p ≥1
22p, so no such C > 0 can exist.
Example 3.11 (Cauchy sequences). As AWp ≤WG,p a Cauchy sequence in (PG
p (X),WG,p)
will be Cauchy for AWp. The converse is false. Indeed, in the example above, it is easy to see
that both (µ( 1
m ))m≥1 and (ν( 1
m ))m≥1 are Cauchy in both AWp and WG,p (by always trans-
porting ±ε1 to ±ε2 coordinatewise). However, the example above shows that the sequence
formed by alternating elements of (µ( 1
m ))m≥1 and (ν( 1
m ))m≥1 is Cauchy in AWp, but not in
WG,p.
The question of the completion of (PG
p (X),WG,p) alongside compactness properties are
reserved for future study.
In the case of adapted Wasserstein distances, completion and
compactness were studied in Bartl et al. (2024), Eder (2019).
Example 3.12 (Non-separable spaces). Note that the assumption that our metric spaces
(Xi,di) are separable is key for Theorem 3.8 to hold.
Indeed consider Gmerge again, and on R3 the metric given by d(x,y) ∶= ∣x1 −y1∣+∣x2 −y2∣+
1x3≠y3.
Let λ be the uniform measure on [0,1], and for ε > 0 define µ(ε) ∈PGmerge (R3) as the
pushforward of the measure ( 1
2δε + 1
2δ−ε) ⊗λ through the map (x1,x2) ↦(x1,x2,x1 + x2). It
is easy to see that µ(ε) converges in AW1 as ε ↘0 to the measure ν ∈PGmerge (R3) defined
as the pushforward of the measure λ through the map y2 ↦(0,y2,y2).
However, for any π(ε) ∈Πbc
G (µ(ε),ν), we have
∫d(x,y)dπ(x,y) = ε + ∫∣x2 −y2∣dπ(ε)
2 (x2,y2)
+ 1
2 ∫1(x2+ε)≠y2 dπ(ε)
2 (x2,y2) + 1
2 ∫1(x2−ε)≠y2 dπ(ε)
2 (x2,y2) ≥1
2,
and so WG,1(µ(ε),ν) /→0 as ε ↘0.
Example 3.13 (Stochastic team games). Continuing Example 3.10, consider the stochastic
team game for three DMs with information structure given by Gmerge.
We choose A = [−1,1]3 and objective function Q ∶R3 × A, given by Q(x,a) ∶= ∣x3 −a2∣,
which satisfies the assumptions of Theorem 3.5. Then
v(µ) = inf {Eµ [∣X3 −α2(X2)∣]∣α2 ∶R →Ameasurable}.
Then it is easy to see that
v(µ(ε)) =
inf
a±∈[−1,1]
1
4 (∣1 −a+∣+ ∣1 −a−∣+ ∣−1 −a+∣+ ∣−1 −a−∣) = 1,
v(ν(ε)) =
inf
a±∈[−1,1]
1
2 (∣1 −a+∣+ ∣−1 −a−∣) = 0.
As AW1(µ(ε),ν(ε)) →0 as ε ↘0, we see that v is not Lipschitz continuous (or in fact uniformly
continuous) with respect to AW1. In contrast, Theorem 3.5 shows v is Lipschitz continuous
in WGmerge,1 and thus graph causal Wasserstein distances provide a better metric to use for
estimating errors of model misspecification for stochastic team games with a quasi-classical
information structure.
13


4
Graph Causal Optimal Transport
We move now from the discussion of graph causal Wasserstein distances to the more general
graph causal OT problem, i.e., the equivalent of the classical OT problem but with additional
G-bicausality requirements on the couplings. Given a directed graph G, µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈
PG (Y) and a cost function ξ ∶X × Y →R, we define the graph causal OT problem as
PG(µ,ν) ∶=
inf
π∈Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫X×Y ξ(x,y)dπ(x,y).
(4)
Whilst the restriction on couplings reflects causal relations between different variables and
may be natural in many applications, it is far from innocent and imposes intricate structural
difficulties. The set Πbc
G (µ,ν) is, in general, neither convex nor weakly closed. In addition, as
noted before and explored in detail below, we may not be able to glue couplings together and
preserve G-bicausality. For these reasons, our first focus is on characterising fine structural
properties of the sets PG (X) and Πbc
G (µ,ν), as well as the lifted graph bicausal couplings,
which will form a key element of the proof of Theorems 3.2 and 4.18, and lead to another
characterisation of graph causal Wasserstein distances.
4.1
Equivalent Definitions of G-compatibility and (Bi)causality
We start with equivalent characterisations of the notion of G-compatibility which we intro-
duced in Definition 2.3. These are well-known in the probabilistic graphical models literature.
We refer the reader to (Bongers et al., 2021, Theorem 3.2.1) for a complete statement and
proof containing yet further equivalent characterisations, among which we mention the d-
separation criterion (Pearl, 1988), and a discussion for measures admitting a density. Partial
versions appear in, e.g., (Lauritzen, 2026, Theorem 4.38) and (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025,
Definition 3.1).
Proposition 4.1. Let G be a DAG and µ ∈P (X). The following are equivalent:
1) µ ∈PG (X);
2) There exists a random variable X ∼µ, independent R-valued random variables (Ui)i∈V ,
and measurable functions fi∶Xpai × R →Xi,i ∈V such that Xi = fi(Xpai,Ui), ∀i ∈V .
If G is a sorted DAG, the above are further equivalent to the following:
3) µ admits a disintegration µ(dx) = ⊗n
i=1 µi(dxi∣xpai);
4) If X ∼µ then
Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
X1∶i−1,
2 ≤i ≤n.
Remark 4.2. The first two characterisations make it clear that G-compatibility is invariant
under relabelling. In particular, the latter two characterisations hold for one relabelling which
turns G into a sorted DAG if and only if they work for all such relabellings.
In Definition 2.4 we defined graph (bi)causal couplings between measures which are com-
patible with a DAG, which is the natural context for the main contributions in this paper.
However, building on the characterisation 2) in Proposition 4.1, (Cheridito and Eckstein,
2025, Definition 2.1) proposed a more general definition for possibly cyclical directed graphs
and possibly non-compatible measures, which we now recall. We then show, in Proposition
4.6 below, that Definitions 2.4 and 4.3 agree when G is a DAG and µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y),
and in this context we can, and will, use both definitions interchangeably.
14


Definition 4.3 (Graph (bi)causal couplings for directed graphs). Let G be a directed graph,
µ ∈P (X), ν ∈P (Y). We call a coupling π ∈Π(µ,ν) G-causal if there exists a pair of random
variables (X,Y ) ∼π, measurable functions
fi∶Xi × Xpai × Ypai × R →Yi,
i ∈V,
and R-valued random variables (Ui)i∈V such that σ(X),(σ(Ui))i∈V are independent and
Yi = fi(Xi,Xpai,Ypai,Ui),
∀i ∈V.
We denote by Πc
G (µ,ν) the set of all such G-causal couplings. Moreover, we define the set
of G-anticausal couplings Πac
G (µ,ν) to be the set of measures in Π(µ,ν) whose pushforward
under the map (x,y) ↦(y,x) is in Πc
G (ν,µ), and the set of G-bicausal couplings Πbc
G (µ,ν) ∶=
Πc
G (µ,ν) ∩Πac
G (µ,ν).
Remark 4.4. One easily sees from the above definition that if one relabels the vertices of G,
which includes keeping track of the initial associated spaces Xv, Yv, this will not affect the
set of induced G-causal couplings. Thus, the definition above is invariant under relabelling.
Remark 4.5. Definition 4.3 and the equivalence of 1) and 2) in Proposition 4.1 show that
µ ∈PG (X) if and only if for some (and hence all) y ∈Y the set Πc
G (δy,µ) ⊆{δy ⊗µ} is non-
empty. Thus, G-compatibility is a natural condition if we want graph (bi)causal couplings to
exist, and it is indeed sufficient: see the first part of Proposition 4.7.
Similarly to graph compatibility, the notions of graph (bi)causality from Definition 2.4
have characterisations in terms of conditional independence relations and disintegrations.
These were shown in Cheridito and Eckstein (2025), and we recall the ones necessary for our
proofs in Propositions 4.6 and 4.7 below.
Proposition 4.6. Suppose G is a DAG, µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), and π ∈Π(µ,ν). Then
the following are equivalent:
1) π is G-causal in the sense of Definition 2.4;
2) π is G-causal in the sense of Definition 4.3.
If G is a sorted DAG, the above are further equivalent to the following:
3) When (X,Y ) ∼π the following conditional independence relations hold for 1 ≤i ≤n:
Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xpai,Ypai
(X,Y1∶i−1).
Proof. Since the first two conditions are invariant under relabelling, we may assume without
loss of generality that G is sorted. That 2) is equivalent to 3) was then shown in (Cheridito
and Eckstein, 2025, Theorem 3.4).
That 1) is equivalent to 3) is a consequence of the equivalence of 1) and 4) in Proposition
4.1.
Indeed, using the notation of Definition 2.4, we see 1 ≤... ≤n ≤1′ ≤... ≤n′ is
a topological ordering for Gc, and so π ∈PGc (X × Y) encodes precisely the conditional
independence relations Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
X1∶i−1 for 2 ≤i ≤n (as the parents of i in Gc are the same as
in G, namely pai) and Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xpai,Ypai
(X1∶n,Y1∶i−1) for 1 ≤i ≤n (the parents of i′ in Gc are
precisely {i} ∪pai ∪{j′ ∣j ∈pai}, corresponding to the random variables Xi,Xpai,Ypai). But,
by Proposition 4.1 again, the first set of conditional independence relations always holds as
µ ∈PG (X).
15


Proposition 4.7. Suppose G is a sorted DAG, µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), and π ∈Π(µ,ν).
Then µ ⊗ν ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆Πc
G (µ,ν). Moreover, the following are equivalent:
1) π ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν);
2) When (X,Y ) ∼π the following conditional independence relations hold for 2 ≤i ≤n:
(Xi,Yi)
⊥⊥
Xpai,Ypai
(X1∶i−1,Y1∶i−1),
Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
Ypai,
Yi ⊥⊥
Ypai
Xpai;
3) π may be disintegrated as π(dx,dy) = ⊗n
i=1 πi (dxi,dyi ∣xpai,ypai), with
πi (dxi,dyi ∣xpai,ypai) ∈Π(µi (dxi ∣xpai),νi (dyi ∣ypai))
π-a.s. for all 1 ≤i ≤n.
Proof. See (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Corollary 3.5, Proposition 3.6).
4.2
Gluing Properties
The notion of gluing is a classical tool in the theory of optimal transport, often used to show
that the triangle inequality holds for different variants of Wasserstein distances.
Definition 4.8 (Gluing). Let A,B,C be Polish spaces and let π1 ∈P (A × B), π2 ∈P (B × C)
such that projB#π1 = projB#π2 =∶ν ∈P (B). Let π2 be disintegrated as π2(db,dc) = ν(db) ⊗
κ(dc ∣b) for a stochastic kernel κ.
Then π1 ˙⊗π2 is defined as the measure
π1 ˙⊗π2(da,db,dc) ∶= π1(da,db) ⊗κ(dc ∣b) ∈P (A × B × C),
and is called the conditional independent product of π1, π2. Its A × C marginal, π1 ○g π2 ∶=
projA×C#π1 ˙⊗π2 is called the gluing of π1, π2.
The classical gluing lemma (Villani, 2003, Lemma 7.6) states that if π ∈Π(µ,ν) and
˜π ∈Π(ν,η) for marginals µ,ν,η, then π ○g ˜π ∈Π(µ,η), thus providing a way of combining two
transport plans, one from µ to ν, and one from ν to η into a transport plan from µ to η. We
are interested in whether graph causal restrictions are preserved under the gluing operation.
Definition 4.9 ((Bi)causal gluing property). We say that the directed graph G has the
(bi)causal gluing property if whenever µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), η ∈PG (Z) for some products
of Polish spaces X,Y,Z, and π ∈Πc
G (µ,ν), ˜π ∈Πc
G (ν,η) (respectively π ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν), ˜π ∈
Πbc
G (ν,η)), we have that π ○g ˜π ∈Πc
G (µ,η) (respectively π ○g ˜π ∈Πbc
G (µ,η)).
To characterise fully causal gluing properties for DAGs, we need to define the notion of a
split, also known as an unshielded fork.
Definition 4.10 (Splits). Let G = (V,E) be a directed graph. If i,j,k ∈V are such that
i ∈paj ∩pak but j ∉pak and k ∉paj, we call the triplet (i,j,k) a split. If no such triplet
exists, we say G contains no splits.
Theorem 4.11. For a DAG G, the following are equivalent:
1. G has the causal gluing property;
16


2. G has the bicausal gluing property;
3. G is transitively closed and has no splits.
Remark 4.12. If π′ is the pushforward of the measure π under the map (x,y) ↦(y,x), ˜π′
is the pushforward of the measure ˜π under the map (y,z) ↦(z,y), then the pushforward of
π ○g ˜π under the map (x,z) ↦(z,x) is ˜π′ ○g π′. Thus, one easily sees that if G has the causal
gluing property, it also has the bicausal gluing property.
The proof of Theorem 4.11 is given in Section 6.5. An interesting and novel feature of
graph causal optimal transport, as highlighted by Theorems 3.2 and 4.11, is that while the
bicausal gluing property is sufficient for the triangle inequality to hold (by a trivial modifi-
cation of the proof of (Villani, 2003, Theorem 7.3)), it is not necessary. Indeed, the graph
Gsplit, with vertex set {1,2,3} and edge set {(1,2),(1,3)}, is transitively closed but contains
a split. Hence, WGsplit,p is a proper distance, even if Gsplit does not have the (bicausal) gluing
property. Working to develop tools that will enable us to prove this, and Theorem 3.2 more
generally, we will now look at denseness of Monge couplings and subsequently introduce lifted
graph bicausal couplings.
The inductive construction technique used in the proof of Theorem 4.11 can also be used
to understand weak closure properties of PG (X), the set of graph compatible measures.
By (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Proposition 3.3), we know that PG (X) is closed in total
variation, and that if X is a discrete Polish space, PG (X) is also weakly closed.
How-
ever, in general PG (X) is not necessarily weakly closed and (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025,
Proposition 3.3) provides an example for the case G = Gchain. We are able to provide a full
characterisation of the graphs G for which PG (X) is weakly closed for a general Polish space
X.
Proposition 4.13. If G is transitively closed and contains no splits, then PG (X) is weakly
closed. Otherwise, PG (Rn) is not weakly closed.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 4.11. If G does not have the transi-
tive closure or no splits properties, Example B.1 shows PG (Rn) is not closed. Otherwise,
combining Lemmas B.2, B.3, and Lemma 6.13, we see that PG (X) is weakly closed.
4.3
Denseness of G-biadapted Monge Couplings
Monge couplings between marginals µ ∈P (X) and ν ∈P (Y) are transport plans of the form
(Id,T)#µ which are supported on the graph of some measurable map T ∶X →Y such that
T #µ = ν. We denote by T (µ,ν) ⊆Π(µ,ν) the set of all such Monge couplings.
They are named after Gaspard Monge, who originally introduced the optimal transport
problem in Monge (1781) as a minimisation of an expected cost over T (µ,ν). In modern
OT theory, following Kantorovich (1942), the optimisation is done over couplings Π(µ,ν)
which is a convex set, resulting in a well posed problem with a natural dual (Kantorovich
and Rubinstein, 1958), see also (Kellerer, 1984) and the discussion therein. Nevertheless,
Monge couplings remain an important object. In some cases the optimal coupling is a Monge
one, most notably for the squared distance cost on Rd, where the seminal result of Brenier
(1991) showed it is supported on a gradient of a convex function. More generally, provided µ
contains no atoms, T (µ,ν) is weakly dense in Π(µ,ν), and thus the Monge and Kantorovich
formulations of the optimal transport problem agree (see e.g. Pratelli (2007))
inf
π∈T (µ,ν)∫c(x,y)dπ(x,y) =
inf
π∈Π(µ,ν)∫c(x,y)dπ(x,y),
17


for any continuous and bounded c ∶X →Y →R. A similar denseness result holds if we
restrict to Monge couplings supported on graphs of bijective maps, provided now both µ and
ν contain no atoms (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 2.6). We generalise this denseness result
to graph bicausal couplings. Our Monge maps are restricted to respect the graph structure
in the sense of the following definition:
Definition 4.14 (G-adapted maps). We say a function T ∶∏n
i=1 Xi →∏n
i=1 Yi is G-adapted
if it can be written as
T(x) = (Ti(xi,xpai))1≤i≤n
for some functions Ti ∶Xi × Xpai →Yi. We call T G-biadapted if it is G-adapted, bijective,
and its inverse is itself G-adapted.
Given µ ∈P (X), ν ∈P (Y), we denote the set of all Monge couplings of µ and ν induced by
G-biadapted maps as
TG (µ,ν) ∶= {(Id,T)#µ∣T G−biadapted,T #µ = ν}.
Note that TG (µ,ν) ⊆Πbc
G (µ,ν) for µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y). This follows directly by
verifying the conditional independence relations using the structure of G-biadapted maps.
Remark 4.15. With G = Gn, the definition above recovers the notions of adapted and
biadapted maps from Beiglb¨ock et al. (2025). Theorem 4.18 below can then be seen as a
generalisation of (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 3.11).
We record, for future use, the following self-evident property of G-adapted maps:
Lemma 4.16. Suppose G is a transitively closed DAG and Y = X. Then the set of G-adapted
maps, and the set of G-biadapted maps, are closed under composition.
As is the case of classical optimal transport, in order to prove a version of denseness of
Monge couplings, we need to assume the measures are sufficiently regular.
Assumption 4.17. We say a measure µ ∈PG (X) satisfies the continuity assumption if it
has a disintegration
µ(dx) =
n
⊗
i=1
µi(dxi∣xpai)
(5)
for some stochastic kernels µi(dxi∣xpai) which contain no atoms for all xpai ∈Xpai, under
some sorted relabelling of G.
We can now state the key denseness result. Its proof is deferred to Section 6.7.
Theorem 4.18. Suppose G is a transitively closed DAG. Let µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y) satisfy
Assumption 4.17. Then the set TG (µ,ν) is weakly dense in Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Let p ≥1. If furthermore µ, ν have finite pth moments, then we have Wp-denseness.
Remark 4.19. As shown in Proposition 4.1, µ ∈PG (X) if and only if it has a disintegration
of the form (5) under any sorted relabelling. The actual restriction in Assumption 4.17 is
therefore on the absence of atoms in the disintegration kernels which is the natural extension
from the bicausal case in (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Assumption 3.7).
18


4.4
Lifted Graph Bicausality
As noted in Section 4.2 there are graphs G for which the graph causal Wasserstein distance
is a true metric, while a version of the gluing lemma does not hold because the gluing of two
G-(bi)causal couplings is not necessarily G-(bi)causal. To avoid this difficulty in gluing, we
introduce a slightly relaxed notion of G-bicausality, which we call lifted G-bicausality, that
can be easily seen to satisfy a version of the gluing lemma when G is transitively closed.
They are projections of G-biadapted Monge couplings between measures on a lifted space,
allowing for independent randomisation at every node.
To make this more precise, we first set up some notation for the lifted space. Let ˆ
Xi ∶=
Xi × [0,1], ˆ
X ∶= ∏n
i=1 ˆ
Xi, with similar notation for ˆYi, ˆY. We denote by (xi,ui) a generic
element of ˆ
Xi, (yi,vi) a generic element of ˆYi and, slightly abusing the ordering, (x1∶n,u1∶n)
and (y1∶n,v1∶n) are generic elements of ˆ
X and ˆY respectively. For k ≥1 we write λk for the
uniform measure on [0,1]k. For a measure µ ∈P (X), we denote by ˆµ ∈P ( ˆ
X) the pushforward
of the measure µ ⊗λn under the reordering (x,u) ↦(x1,u1,...,xn,un). Similarly, up to the
obvious reordering, for ν ∈P (Y), ˆν ∶= ν ⊗λn ∈P ( ˆY).
Note that µ ∈PG (X) implies
ˆµ ∈PG ( ˆ
X).
Definition 4.20 (Lifted G-bicausal coupling). For µ ∈P (X), ν ∈P (Y), we say a coupling
π ∈Π(µ,ν) is lifted G-bicausal if there exists ˆπ ∈TG (ˆµ, ˆν) such that π = projX×Y #ˆπ. We
writê Πbc
G (µ,ν) for the set of lifted G-bicausal couplings between µ and ν.
More generally, the set of generalised lifted G-bicausal couplings is given bỹ
Πbc
G (µ,ν) ∶= {projX×Y #ˆπ ∶ˆπ ∈Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν)}.
The definition of lifted couplings was inspired by Beiglb¨ock et al. (2025), in which bicausal
couplings are written as projections of biadapted Monge couplings on a lifted space in order
to obtain a denseness result. We show below that for transitively closed graphs, lifted graph
bicausality is indeed a relaxation of graph bicausality. The more general definition of gener-
alised lifted graph bicausal couplings is necessary to deal with non-transitively closed DAGs,
but in the case of transitively closed DAGs it agrees with the notion of lifted graph bicausal
couplings. We note that for non-transitively closed DAGs the two are generally different, see
Example C.3.
Theorem 4.21. Suppose G is a transitively closed DAG and µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y). Then
Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Moreover, if ˆπ ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν), then there exists a probability measure ρ ∈P (P (X × Y)) such
that ˆπ = ∫π dρ(π) and ρ is supported on Πbc
G (µ,ν).
In particular, the following hold:
Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) =̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆conv (Πbc
G (µ,ν)),
(6)
and all inclusions above may be strict.
The important question of when equality holds in the first inclusion in (6) is addressed
next.
Theorem 4.22. Suppose G is a transitively closed DAG and µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y). If G
has no splits then
Πbc
G (µ,ν) =̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν)
and is weakly closed. Otherwise, if G has a split, the inclusion Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) may be
strict, and Πbc
G (µ,ν) may not be weakly closed.
19


Remark 4.23. The first inclusion in Theorem 4.21 can be reformulated by saying that if
π ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν), then there exists a G-biadapted map T ∶ˆ
X →ˆY such that ˆπ ∶= (Id,T)#ˆµ ∈
Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν) (i.e., T #ˆµ = ˆν) and projX×Y #ˆπ = π. When G = Gn is the linear graph, this recovers
the forward direction of (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 3.5). And, as a special case when
n = 1, we see that any coupling can be seen as a projection of a Monge coupling induced by
a bijective map on the lifted space, a well-known result in classical optimal transport. As
Gn has no splits, Theorem 4.22 recovers the converse direction in (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025,
Theorem 3.5), namely Πbc
Gn (µ,ν) =̂ Πbc
Gn (µ,ν). For general transitively closed DAGs however
this equality no longer holds true, see the discussion at the start of Section 6.6.
Remark 4.24. We note that as a consequence of Theorem 4.22 above and the counterex-
ample in (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Proposition 3.6(iv)), which extends to any non-
transitively closed DAG as observed in Example 6.17 below, we see that Πbc
G (µ,ν) is weakly
closed in general if and only if G is transitively closed and contains no splits, thus comple-
menting the results of (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Proposition 3.6).
The proofs of Theorems 4.21 and 4.22 are given, respectively, in Sections 6.2 and 6.6. We
note that from the definition, the following inclusions are immediate:
Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν)
and̂
Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν).
(7)
We now present a first important application of the results above.
Corollary 4.25. Suppose G is a transitively closed DAG, µ ∈PG (X),ν ∈PG (Y) and
ξ ∶X ×Y →R is measurable with ξ(x,y) ≥a(x)+b(y) for two upper semicontinuous functions
a ∈L1(µ),b ∈L1(ν). Then
PG(µ,ν) =
inf
π∈̂Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫X×Y ξ(x,y)dπ(x,y) =
inf
π∈̃Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫X×Y ξ(x,y)dπ(x,y).
If G has no splits and ξ is lower semicontinuous, then PG(µ,ν) is attained by some π ∈
Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Proof. Integrability assumptions on a,b allow us to replace ξ by ξ −a −b ≥0 and use Fu-
bini. Theorem 4.21 then yields the first assertion, allowing us to replace Πbc
G (µ,ν) in (4) bŷ
Πbc
G (µ,ν) =̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν). The second part follows from classical OT proofs, see (Villani, 2009,
Thm. 4.1), and the fact that Πbc
G (µ,ν) is closed by Theorem 4.22.
Taking X = Y and c = dp
X we obtain
WG,p(µ,ν)p =
inf
ˆπ∈̂Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫dX (x,y)p dˆπ(x,y).
(8)
We use this representation to prove Theorem 3.2. The key advantage of lifted G-bicausal
couplings is that they have nice gluing properties provided G is transitively closed: if π ∈̂
Πbc
G (µ,ν) and π′ ∈̂ Πbc
G (ν,η) for marginals µ,ν,η, then π ○g π′ ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,η), as shown in Lemma
6.6, and using the key observations noted in Lemma 4.16 above.
With this lifted graph
bicausal version of the gluing lemma in place, one can then replicate the classical proof of
the triangle inequality for Wasserstein distances to obtain Theorem 3.2 (see Section 6.3).
To close this section, we consider DAGs which are not transitively closed. We know that
WG,p may no longer be a metric in this case and Corollary 4.25 actually suggests a possible
remedy and an improved definition of G-causal Wasserstein distances.
20


Definition 4.26 (Lifted graph causal Wasserstein distances). Let G be a directed graph and
p ≥1. The pth order lifted G-causal Wasserstein distance between µ,ν ∈PG
p (X) is given bỹ
WG,p(µ,ν)p ∶=
inf
π∈̃Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫dX (x,y)p dπ(x,y).
It turns out this object is always a metric for DAGs and we can understand precisely why.
To this end, for a general DAG, consider its transitive closure, which is obtained explicitly
by adding in all ancestors of each vertex to its parent set.
Definition 4.27 (Transitive closure). For a directed graph G = (V,E), we define its tran-
sitive closure, denoted by G, as the directed graph with vertex set V and edge set E =
{(i,j)∣j ∈V,i ∈anj ∖{j}}.
It is easy to see that G is the DAG with the least number of edges on the same vertex
set which is transitively closed and has G as a subgraph. When G is a sorted DAG with n
vertices, then G ⊆G ⊆Gn.
Proposition 4.28. Let G be a DAG, p ≥1, µ,ν ∈PG
p (X). Theñ WG,p(µ,ν) = WG,p(µ,ν)
and is a metric on PG
p (X).
Proof. The key observation is that Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν), see Lemma C.1. This shows that
WG,p ≥̃ WG,p. We know from Corollary 4.25 that WG,p =̃ WG,p. Finally, since G has more
edges than G, we havẽ Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν) and hencẽ WG,p ≤̃ WG,p, giving the desired
equality by sandwiching. WG,p is a metric by Theorem 3.2.
Note that̃ WG,p is, in a certain way, the minimal object which cures the non-metric issue
of WG,p in general. Specifically, if we look for G′, with G ⊆G′, for which WG′,p is a metric,
then any G′ ⊊G is not transitively closed, so it contains Gchain as a proper subgraph and
hence, by the arguments in the proof of Theorem 3.2, there is a choice of (X,dX ) for which
WG′,p does not satisfy the triangle inequality on PG (p)X. Hence, G′ = G is the minimal
choice.
4.5
Complexity and Prospects for Duality for Graph Causal OT
Duality in the classical optimal transport theory reformulates the minimisation problem
over couplings as a maximisation problem over pairs of potentials, see Ramachandran and
R¨uschendorf (1995) and the references therein. It has played a major role, both for the the-
oretical aspects, such as in characterising optimal couplings via certain geometric properties
of their support, and for its numerical methods, such as for the (Cuturi, 2013) Sinkhorn algo-
rithm. More recently, for causal optimal transport, duality was first established in Backhoff
et al. (2017).
A natural question is what is the dual formulation to the general graph causal OT problem
(4), outside of the special cases of classical OT (corresponding to G = G1) and causal/adapted
OT (corresponding to G = Gn). While an abstract theoretical formulation can be described
(by looking at the closed convex hull of the constraint set conv (Πbc
G (µ,ν))), we argue that a
tractable dual formulation is, in general, most likely out of reach.
Indeed, for the case that G is the graph with two independent nodes ({1,2},∅) and
marginals µ = µ1 ⊗µ2,ν = ν1 ⊗ν2 ∈PG (R2), the set of permissible couplings for the graph
causal OT problem (4) is {π1 ⊗π2 ∣πi ∈Π(µi,νi)} (by Proposition 4.7).
When µi,νi are
21


supported uniformly on m ≥1 points each, the problem thus reduces to the bilinear assignment
problem (BAP) of Altman (1968):
min
π(1)
ij ,π(2)
kl
∑
1≤i,j,k,l≤m
ξijklπ(1)
ij π(2)
kl
s.t.
m
∑
j′=1
π(1)
ij′ = 1,
m
∑
i′=1
π(1)
i′j = 1,
1 ≤i,j ≤m,
m
∑
l′=1
π(2)
kl′ = 1,
m
∑
k′=1
π(2)
k′l = 1,
1 ≤k,l ≤m,
π(1)
ij ,π(2)
kl ∈{0,1},
1 ≤i,j,k,l ≤m.
If we removed the causal constraint we would have obtained a simple LP problem, solvable in
polynomial time. In contrast, the bilinear assignment problem is well-known to be NP-hard
(´Custi´c et al., 2017). Finding a polynomial algorithm to solve it or its dual would imply
(P)=(NP) and hence is unlikely to be simple. All DAGs, apart from those with a linear
information structure Gn, have the graph with two independent nodes as a proper subgraph,
and hence have its graph causal OT problem as a subproblem of their associated graph causal
OT problem. The lack of a tractable duality can be seen to propagate from the BAP, to the
graph causal OT for the DAG on two independent nodes, and to the graph causal OT problem
for all DAGs except those with a linear information structure Gn.
The difficulty in describing the dual of the graph causal OT problem lies in the fact that
the conditional independence constraints in Proposition 4.7 involve random variables from
both marginals. The causal constraints given by Gn can however be rewritten as X ⊥⊥
X1∶i Y1∶i,
Y ⊥⊥
X1∶i X1∶i for 1 ≤i ≤n, thus allowing the causal OT problem to be written as an LP program
when its marginals are finitely supported, as shown in (Eckstein and Pammer, 2024, Lemma
3.11).
We note that when µ,ν are finitely supported, but not necessarily uniformly on the same
number of points, the graph causal OT problem on two independent nodes above coincides
with the CO-OT problem Redko et al. (2020). Another related problem is the computation of
the Gromov-Wasserstein distance (M´emoli, 2011), a popular OT distance between measures
on different domains, whose elements cannot be easily compared.
The marginals in this
problem take the form µ = µ1 ⊗µ1, ν = ν1 ⊗ν1, while the set of permissible couplings is now
{π1 ⊗π1 ∣π1 ∈Π(µ1,ν1)}. When µi,νi are supported uniformly on m ≥1 points each, one
recovers a quadratic assignment problem (QAP) (C¸ela, 1998), corresponding to adding the
constraint that π(1)
ij
= π(2)
ij
to the BAP. The QAP itself is also NP-hard and by the same
token as above, a tractable dual formulation for Gromov-Wasserstein OT is not accessible.
At the same time, dual formulations are possible and different variants could be envisaged to
obtain specific types of results. Zhang et al. (2024) provide a recent illustration: whilst their
dual formulation is not necessarily numerically tractable itself, it lends itself to the study
of entropic relaxations and statistical properties such as sample complexity. Extending such
results to graph causal OT would be an interesting direction for future research.
5
Dynamic Programming Principle for Graph Causal
Distances
We recall that the graph causal Wasserstein distance corresponding to the linear graph Gn
is called the adapted Wasserstein distance. In this section we establish that this distance is
22


in fact shared between all the subrgaphs of Gn which do not have merges, i.e., are perfect.
This can be achieved by a dynamic programming principle (DPP) approach. We present the
key results here and defer further discussion, technical results and proofs to Section 6.8.
We assume (via a possible relabelling) that G is a sorted DAG. In order to establish a
convenient equivalent characterisation of perfect DAGs, we introduce the following notation:
Definition 5.1 (Proximal parent). We define the proximal parent map prox ∶V →V by
prox(i) ∶=
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
maxpai
if pai ≠∅,
i
if pai = ∅.
If pai ≠∅, we call prox(i) the proximal parent of i.
Proposition 5.2. Let G be a sorted DAG. Then the following are equivalent:
1) G is perfect, in the sense of Definition 2.1;
2) for every i ∈V , pai ⊆paprox(i) ∪{prox(i)}.
We note that the notion of perfection is well studied in the graphical models literature
in the more general context of chain graphs, see (Lauritzen, 2026, Section 2.1). We prove
the above Proposition, provide further discussion, comparison with Lauritzen (2026), and yet
another equivalent characterisation in Section 6.8.
The assumption that G is perfect thus ensures that either i ∈V has no parents, or there
exists a unique j ∈pai such that no other k ∈pai is a child of j. In this latter case, j = prox(i)
and it is the unique node with the property that the longest possible directed path from it to
node i has length 1. All other elements of pai have a directed path of length at least 2 from
themselves to i. Interpreting proximity between nodes in this sense, prox(i) is the closest
node to i among pai, justifying the name of proximal parent.
We note that this characterisation of proximal parents is label-independent, and thus
choosing a different relabelling of G into a sorted DAG would not change whether G is
perfect. This was also clear from Definition 2.1. Perfect DAGs look like forests of directed
trees to which edges have been added according to the following rule: if an edge is added
from a node i to a node j, an edge must be added from k to j for every node k on the shortest
directed path in the tree from i to j. Proposition 6.21 makes this intuitive description precise.
Assume G is perfect. Suppose our cost function c ∶X × Y →[0,∞] is G-separable in the
sense that it can be written as
c(x,y) =
n
∑
i=1
ci(xi,xpai,yi,ypai)
(9)
for some ci ∶X{i}∪pai × Y{i}∪pai →[0,∞].
Recalling the third characterisation of graph bicausality from Proposition 4.7 and using
the shorthand kb for a kernel k(da ∣b), the G-bicausal transport problem may be written as
V G,c(µ,ν) =
inf
π∈Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫c(x,y)dπ(x,y)
=
inf
π∈Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫c1 + (∫c2 + (... + (∫cn dπ
xpan,ypan
n
)...) dπ
xpa2,ypa2
2
) dπ1.
This inspires a DPP approach similar to the one in (Backhoff et al., 2017, Section 5). We
define the following intermediate problems
V G,c
n
(xpan,ypan) ∶=
inf
π∈Π(µ
xpan
n
,ν
ypan
n
)∫cn(xn,xpan,yn,ypan)dπ(xn,yn)
23


and recursively for n −1 ≥k ≥1, V G,c
k
(xpak,ypak) ∶=
∶=
inf
π∈Π(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
)∫ck(xk,xpak,yk,ypak) + ∑
i∈Ak
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)dπ(xk,yk),
where Ak ∶= {i ∈V ∖{k}∣prox(i) = k}.
Note that Ak ⊆{k + 1,...,n}, so the recursion is well-defined provided the integrals exist,
which we show in Proposition 5.3. Moreover, as G is perfect, we see that for each i ∈Ak,
pai ⊆pak∪{k}, so indeed V G,c
k
only depends on xpak,ypak. When pak = ∅, V G,c
k
is a constant.
Finally, we define A0 ∶= {k ∈V ∣pak = ∅} = {k ∈V ∣prox(k) = k} and
DPPG,c(µ,ν) ∶= ∑
k∈A0
V G,c
k
.
We can now state the DPP for G-bicausal transport.
Proposition 5.3. If G is a sorted perfect DAG, µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), c ∶X ×Y →[0,∞] is
G-separable, and ck is lower semi-analytic for all 1 ≤k ≤n, then DPPG,c(µ,ν) is well-defined
and
V G,c(µ,ν) = DPPG,c(µ,ν).
As a consequence of the DPP, we obtain the following:
Theorem 5.4. Let G be a sorted perfect DAG and p ≥1. Assume the underlying metric on
X takes the form dX (x,y)p = ∑i∈V dXi(xi,yi)p for all x,y ∈X. If µ,ν ∈PG
p (X), then
WG,p(µ,ν) = AWp(µ,ν).
While bicausal transport plans are more general, allowing you to use all the information of
the previous nodes at each step, Theorem 5.4 shows that when µ, ν are themselves compatible
with the graph structure, this extra information results in no improvement. This readily
implies that graph causal Wasserstein distances generated by all the “intermediate” graphs
also coincide:
WG,p(µ,ν) = WG′,p(µ,ν),
∀G ⊆G′ ⊆Gn;µ,ν ∈PG (X).
(10)
In particular, taking G′ = G we also have equality WG,p =̃ WG,p = AWp on PG (X).
Assumptions in Theorem 5.4 are sharp in the sense that when the distance is not G-
separable, or when G is not assumed perfect, WG,p ≠AWp in general, as shown in Examples
6.2 and 6.3.
6
Proofs
This section contains the proofs of our main results presented so far, alongside numerous
technical side results required. We start with some examples and counterexamples which are
helpful in building intuition, as well as serving later on to give reverse directions in some
of the proofs. The proofs are then presented in their logical order, which is different to the
order in which we presented the results in Sections 3–5. Specifically, we first prove Theorem
4.21. This, in particular, implies Corollary 4.25 holds. It enables us to then prove Theorem
3.2. Once we have the metric property, we can study topology and prove Theorem 3.8, along
with some stepping-stone results. We then turn to characterising when bicausal couplings
have the gluing property and establish Theorem 4.11. This includes a series of intermediate
24


results and counterexamples. It leads on to the proof of Theorem 4.22. Next we focus on
the denseness of Monge couplings, Theorem 4.18. The proof relies on us being able to work
on the lifted space and Theorem 4.21 in particular. Finally we move to the discussion of
the dynamic programming principles for perfect sorted DAGs. We prove Proposition 5.2 and
another characterisation in Proposition 6.21. We then show Proposition 5.3 holds. Isometric
embedding is established in Theorem 6.23 and Theorem 5.4 is deduced from it. We finish
the proofs looking at the applications and the associated Lipschitz continuity results stated
in Section 3.2.
6.1
Examples
The following explicit counterexample complements the numerical counterexample provided
in (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Appendix B) showing that Gchain-causal Wasserstein dis-
tances do not generally respect the triangle inequality.
Example 6.1. Consider the following three Gchain-compatible measures:
µ = 1
4 (δ(1,1,1) + δ(1,1,0) + δ(0,1,1) + δ(0,1,0)),
ν = 1
4 (δ(1,2,1) + δ(1,2,0) + δ(0,3,1) + δ(0,3,0)),
η = 1
4 (δ(1,4,1) + δ(1,4,0) + δ(0,4,1) + δ(0,4,0)).
We consider the bijections T1 between the supports of µ and ν, and T2 between the
supports of ν and η given by the diagram below:
(1,1,1)
T1↦(1,2,1)
T2↦(1,4,1)
(1,1,0) ↦(1,2,0) ↦(1,4,0)
(0,1,1) ↦(0,3,1) ↦(0,4,0)
(0,1,0) ↦(0,3,0) ↦(0,4,1)
One can check that (Id,T1)#µ ∈Πbc
Gchain (µ,ν), and (Id,T2)#ν ∈Πbc
Gchain (ν,η). Crucially,
note that (Id,T2 ○T1)#µ ∉Πbc
Gchain (µ,η).
The bijections split the supports of the three measures into four equivalence classes, whose
elements form each row of the diagram above. Denote this equivalence relation by ≈.
Let ε > 0, p ≥1. One may define a metric dε on suppµ ∪suppν ∪suppη via dε(x,y) ∶=
(ε1x≈y + 1
ε1x/≈y)1x≠y.
Under this metric, WGchain,p(µ,ν) ≤(∫dp
ε(x,T1(x))dµ(x))
1
p = ε, and symmetrically
WGchain,p(ν,η) ≤ε.
As both µ and η have constant second coordinates, (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Corol-
lary 3.5(iii)) implies that any π ∈Πbc
Gchain (µ,η) can be disintegrated as π = π1 ⊗δ(1,4) ⊗π3
for some π1,π3 ∈Π(P,P), where P ∶= 1
2(δ0 + δ1) = µ1 = η1 = µ3 = η3. One can easily check
that any such coupling places at most a mass of 1
2 on the set {(x,y) ∈suppµ × suppη ∣x ≈y}.
Hence, provided we choose ε < 1
2,
WGchain,p(µ,η) ≥( 1
2εp )
1
p
≥1
2ε > 2ε ≥WGchain,p(µ,ν) + WGchain,p(ν,η).
25


The next two examples show that graph causal Wasserstein distances are indeed generally
different from Wasserstein or adapted Wasserstein distances, despite coinciding for certain
classes of graphs and underlying costs, as discussed in Theorem 5.4. This was already shown
in Example 3.10 and these two examples complement the discussion in Section 3.3.
Example 6.2. Let G = ({1,2},∅) be the graph with two unconnected nodes, a,b,c,d be
distinct real numbers, and µ,ν ∈PG (R2) be given by µ = 1
4 (δ(a,a) + δ(a,b) + δ(b,a) + δ(b,b)),
ν = 1
4 (δ(c,c) + δ(c,d) + δ(d,c) + δ(d,d)). We consider a cost function as given by the following
table, which can be extended to a metric on R2:
(c,c)
(c,d)
(d,c)
(d,d)
(a,a)
3
4
4
3
(a,b)
4
3
3
4
(b,a)
3
4
4
3
(b,b)
4
3
3
4
Since any G-bicausal coupling must take the form π1 ⊗π2 for π1,π2 ∈Π( 1
2δa + 1
2δb, 1
2δc + 1
2δd)
(which are fully parametrised by πi((a,c))), one can check all of them result in the same
cost, and so WG,1(µ,ν) = 3.5.
However, the map given by (a,a) ↦(c,c), (a,b) ↦(c,d), (b,a) ↦(d,d),(b,b) ↦(d,c)
is a biadapted Monge map between µ and ν which induces the optimal cost of 3. Hence,
W1(µ,ν) = AW1(µ,ν) = 3 < 3.5 = WG,1(µ,ν).
It was essential in the example above that the cost did not separate in the form d1(x1,y1)+
d2(x2,y2), as otherwise we would be in the setting of Theorem 5.4. If we want our cost to
separate, we need to look at a larger graph. In these settings, it usually suffices to simply add
a new node which is a child of every node in the original graph, as illustrated in the example
below.
Example 6.3. Let G = ({1,2,3},{(1,3),(2,3)}), a,b,c ∈R2 represent the vertices of an
equilateral triangle with side length 2, and µ,ν ∈PG (R × R × R2) be given by
µ = 1
4 (δ(0,0,a) + δ(0,1,b) + δ(1,0,c) + δ(1,1,c)),
ν = 1
4 (δ(0,0,c) + δ(0,1,c) + δ(1,0,b) + δ(1,1,a)).
We take the metric d(x,y) = ∣x1 −y1∣+ ∣x2 −y2∣+ ∥x3 −y3∥2 as our underlying cost, and note
that it separates. Our cost table then looks like this:
(0,0,c)
(0,1,c)
(1,0,b)
(1,1,a)
(0,0,a)
2
3
3
2
(0,1,b)
3
2
2
3
(1,0,c)
1
2
2
3
(1,1,c)
2
1
3
2
By the characterisation of bicausality in terms of disintegrations from Proposition 4.7,
one sees that G-bicausal couplings between µ and ν take the form π1 ⊗π2 ⊗πx1∶2,y1∶2
3
for
π1,π2 ∈Π( 1
2δ0 + 1
2δ1, 1
2δ0 + 1
2δ1) and πx1∶2,y1∶2
3
supported on a single point, consisting of the
third coordinates of the vector beginning with (x1,x2) in the support of µ, respectively of
the vector beginning with (y1,y2) in the support of ν.
Thus again we can describe this family with just two parameters, αi ∶= πi(0,0). Letting
A ∶= α1α2, B ∶= α1( 1
2 −α2), C ∶= ( 1
2 −α1)α2, D ∶= ( 1
2 −α1)( 1
2 −α2), a general G-bicausal
coupling takes the form:
26


(0,0,c)
(0,1,c)
(1,0,b)
(1,1,a)
(0,0,a)
A
B
C
D
(0,1,b)
B
A
D
C
(1,0,c)
C
D
A
B
(1,1,c)
D
C
B
A
All such couplings have a cost of at least 8(A + B + C + D) = 2, and so WG,1(µ,ν) ≥2.
But the map given by (0,0,a) ↦(1,1,a), (0,1,b) ↦(1,0,b), (1,0,c) ↦(0,0,c), (1,1,c) ↦
(0,1,c) is a biadapted Monge map from µ to ν achieving a cost of 1.5.
So, W1(µ,ν) ≤
AW1(µ,ν) ≤1.5 < 2 ≤WG,1(µ,ν).
6.2
Proof of Theorem 4.21
Step 1: Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν)
We start by showing that G-bicausal couplings can be seen as projections of G-biadapted
Monge couplings on a lifted space. The proof is inspired by the corresponding causal OT
result in (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 3.5). The key difference from the original proof in
(Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 3.5) is that we do the induction forward instead of backward
along the causal directions, as this is more suitable for working with the graph structure.
The following elementary lemma paves the way to a recursive characterisation of G-
biadapted maps in Lemma 6.5. For a function f ∶A × B →C, and any a ∈A, we denote by fa
the function b ↦f(a,b).
Lemma 6.4. A function T ∶X1 × X2 →Y1 × Y2 given by T(x1,x2) = (T1(x1),T2(x1,x2)) is
biadapted if and only if
1. T1 ∶X1 →Y1 is bijective;
2. T x1
2
∶X2 →Y2 is bijective for all x1 ∈X1.
In this case, the inverse of T is given by S(y1,y2) = (T −1
1 (y1),(T T −1
1 (y1)
2
)
−1
(y2)) i.e. S1 = T −1
1
and Sy1
2 = (T x1
2 )−1 for x1 = T −1
1 (y1).
Proof. First, suppose T is biadapted. Let S be its inverse. Then for all (x1,x2) ∈X1 × X2
S(T(x1,x2)) = S(T1(x1),T x1
2 (x2)) = (S1(T1(x1)),ST1(x1)
2
(T x1
2 (x2))).
(11)
Since, S ○T = IdX1×X2, this implies that S1 ○T1 = IdX1 and ST1(x1)
2
○T x1
2
= IdX2 for all x1 ∈X1.
Symmetrically, from T ○S = IdY1×Y2, we get that T1 ○S1 = IdY1 and T S1(y1)
2
○Sy1
2 = IdY2 for
all y1 ∈Y1. Plugging in y1 = T1(x1), the conclusion follows.
For the converse, let S1 be the inverse of T1 and, for all y1 ∈Y1, Sy1
2
be the inverse of
T S1(y1)
2
. We define the map S via (y1,y2) ↦(S1(y1),Sy1
2 (y2)). It now suffices to show that
S ○T = IdX1×X2 and T ○S = IdY1×Y2. But these follow easily from identity (11) and its reverse
analogue.
Lemma 6.5. Suppose n > 1 and that G is transitively closed. A function T ∶X →Y given
by T(x) = (T1∶n−1(x1∶n−1),Tn(xn,xpan)) is G-biadapted if and only if
1. T1∶n−1 ∶X1∶n−1 →Y1∶n−1 is G1∶n−1-biadapted;
27


2. T
xpan
n
∶Xn →Yn is bijective for all xpan ∈Xpan.
In this case, the inverse of T is given by S(y) = (S1∶n−1(y1∶n−1),Sy1∶n−1
n
(yn)), where S1∶n−1 =
T −1
1∶n−1 and Sy1∶n−1
n
= (T
xpan
n
)
−1 for x1∶n−1 = S1∶n−1(y1∶n−1).
Proof. The proof builds on Lemma 6.4 by viewing T as a function T ∶(X1∶n−1) × Xn →
(Y1∶n−1) × Yn depending on two parameters, (x1∶n−1,xn). In fact the final statement follows
directly from the final statement of Lemma 6.4.
Suppose T is G-biadapted.
Then, we know its inverse, S can be written as S(y) =
(Si(yi,ypai))1≤i≤n. By Lemma 6.4, we get that T1∶n−1 is bijective, with inverse S1∶n−1. Both
T1∶n−1 and S1∶n−1 are G1∶n−1-adapted, so T1∶n−1 is G1∶n−1-biadapted. Lemma 6.4 also says that
T x1∶n−1
n
= T
xpan
n
is bijective for all x1∶n−1 ∈X1∶n−1.
For the converse, as T is clearly G-adapted, it suffices to check that its inverse S is too.
By Lemma 6.4, we know S1∶n−1 = T −1
1∶n−1. So, as T1∶n−1 is G1∶n−1-biadapted, S1∶n−1 is G1∶n−1-
adapted. Moreover, we know that Sy1∶n−1
n
= (T x1∶n−1
n
)−1 for x1∶n−1 = S1∶n−1(y1∶n−1). But T x1∶n−1
n
only depends on x1∶n−1 through xpan = (Sj(yj,ypaj))j∈pan. Hence, Sy1∶n−1
n
only depends on
y1∶n−1 through yI, where I = pan ∪(⋃j∈pan paj). As G is transitively closed, we see that in
fact I = pan, so indeed we can write Sy1∶n−1
n
= Span
n
, ensuring S is G-adapted.
Proof that Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) . We proceed by induction on the number of nodes n of our
graph G. If n = 1, then a map is G-biadapted if and only if it is bijective, and the result
follows via (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 2.1).
Now assume that n > 1 and we have shown that the result holds for all transitively closed
sorted DAGs with at most n −1 nodes.
Then, by the induction hypothesis, as π1∶n−1 ∈
Πbc
G1∶n−1 (µ1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1), there exists a G1∶n−1-biadapted map ˜T ∶ˆ
X1∶n−1 →ˆY1∶n−1 such that
˜T #ˆµ1∶n−1 = ˆν1∶n−1 and projX1∶n−1×Yn−1#(Id, ˜T)#ˆµ1∶n−1 = π1∶n−1.
Using (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 2.3), there exists a measurable map
S ∶(Xpan × Ypan) × ˆ
Xn →ˆYn
such that for all (xpan,ypan) ∈Xpan × Ypan, the map Sxpan,ypan ∶ˆ
Xn →ˆYn is a Borel iso-
morphism which satisfies Sxpan,ypan #̂µ
xpan
n
=̂ ν
ypan
n
and projXn×Yn#(Id,Sxpan,ypan)#̂µ
xpan
n
=
π
xpan,ypan
n
.
We now define T ∶ˆ
X →ˆY via
T(x1∶n,u1∶n) = ( ˜T(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),Sxpan,projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))(xn,un)).
By Lemma 6.5, T is G-biadapted. It remains to check other desired properties:
(P1) T #ˆµ = ˆν, or equivalently, ˆπ ∶= (Id,T)#ˆµ ∈Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν), and
(P2) projX×Y #ˆπ = π.
28


For property (P1), let f ∶ˆY →R be an arbitrary bounded measurable function. Then
∫f(y1∶n,v1∶n)dT #ˆµ(y1∶n,v1∶n) =
= ∫f ( ˜T(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),Sxpan,projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))(xn,un)) dˆµ(x1∶n,u1∶n)
= ∬f ( ˜T(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),Sxpan,projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))(xn,un)) d̂µ
xpan
n
(xn,un)dˆµ1∶n−1
= ∬f ( ˜T(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),yn,vn) dSxpan,projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))
#̂µ
xpan
n
(yn,vn)dˆµ1∶n−1
= ∬f ( ˜T(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),yn,vn) d̂ν
projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))
n
(yn,vn)dˆµ1∶n−1(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1)
= ∬f (y1∶n,v1∶n) d̂ν
ypan
n
(yn,vn)d ˜T #ˆµ1∶n−1(y1∶n−1,v1∶n−1)
= ∬f (y1∶n,v1∶n) d̂ν
ypan
n
(yn,vn)dˆν1∶n−1(y1∶n−1,v1∶n−1)
= ∫f(y1∶n,v1∶n)dˆν(y1∶n,v1∶n),
so T #ˆµ = ˆν.
For property (P2), let f ∶X × Y →R be an arbitrary bounded measurable function. Then
∫f(x1∶n,y1∶n)dprojX×Y #ˆπ(x1∶n,y1∶n) =
= ∫f(x1∶n,y1∶n)dprojX×Y #(Id,T)#ˆµ(x1∶n,y1∶n)
= ∬f(projX×Y ○(Id,T)(x1∶n,u1∶n))d̂µ
xpan
n
(xn,un)dˆµ1∶n−1(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1)
= ∬f(projX1∶n−1×Y1∶n−1 ○(Id, ˜T)(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),
projXn×Yn ○Sxpan,projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))(xn,un))d̂µ
xpan
n
dˆµ1∶n−1
= ∬f(projX1∶n−1×Y1∶n−1 ○(Id, ˜T)(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),
xn,yn)dπ
xpan,projYpan ( ˜T (x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))
n
(xn,yn)dˆµ1∶n−1
= ∬f(projX1∶n−1×Y1∶n−1 ○(Id, ˜T)(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1),
xn,yn)dπ
projXpan ×Ypan (projX1∶n−1×Y1∶n−1○(Id, ˜T )(x1∶n−1,u1∶n−1))
n
(xn,yn)dˆµ1∶n−1
= ∬f(x1∶n,y1∶n)dπ
xpan,ypan
n
(xn,yn)dprojX1∶n−1×Yn−1#(Id, ˜T)#ˆµ1∶n−1(x1∶n−1,y1∶n−1)
= ∬f(x1∶n,y1∶n)dπ
xpan,ypan
n
(xn,yn)dπ1∶n−1(x1∶n−1,y1∶n−1)
= ∫f(x1∶n,y1∶n)dπ(x1∶n,y1∶n),
so (P2) holds.
The fact that the inclusion Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) may be strict is discussed in detail in
Section 6.6.
Step 2:̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) as convex combinations of elements in Πbc
G (µ,ν)
Proof. We now prove a partial converse to first inclusion, showing that lifted G-bicausal
couplings can be written as convex combinations of G-bicausal couplings.
Let π ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν). Then, by definition, there exists ˆπ ∈TG (ˆµ, ˆν) such that π = projX×Y #ˆπ.
Let (X,U,Y,V ) ∼ˆπ and define for brevity Zi ∶= (Xi,Yi), Wi ∶= (Ui,Vi). Since ˆπ ∈Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν),
29


then by Proposition 4.7, (Zi,Wi)
⊥⊥
Zpai,Wpai
(Z1∶i−1,W1∶i−1) and so Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Wpai
(Z1∶i−1,W1∶i−1)
and Wi
⊥⊥
Zi,Zpai,Wpai
(Z1∶i,W1∶i−1) for all i ∈V . In other words, the law of (Z1,W1,...,Zn,Wn)
is compatible to the graph ˆG with vertex set {z1,w1,...zn,wn} in which node zi has parents
{zpai,wpai} and node wi has parents {zi,zpai,wpai}.
Thus, by Proposition 4.1 applied to ˆG, there exist (by possibly enlarging the sample space)
independent real-valued random variables P1,...,Pn,R1,...,Rn and measurable functions
fi ∶( ˆ
Xpai × ˆYpai)×R →Xi ×Yi, gi ∶(Xi ×Yi)×( ˆ
Xpai × ˆYpai)×R →[0,1]2 such that for all i ∈V
Zi = fi(Zpai,Wpai,Pi),
Wi = gi(Zi,Zpai,Wpai,Ri).
This implies
Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Wpai
(R1∶n,Z1∶i−1,W1∶i−1),
(12)
and hence Zi
⊥⊥
R1∶n,Zpai,Wpai
Z1∶i−1. But, using transitive closure of G and the second equation
above, we see Wpai can be written as a function of Zpai,Rpai and thus σ (R1∶n,Zpai,Wpai) =
σ (R1∶n,Zpai). So, Zi
⊥⊥
R1∶n,Zpai
Z1∶i−1 i.e. (Xi,Yi)
⊥⊥
R1∶n,Xpai,Ypai
(X1∶i−1,Y1∶i−1), for all i ∈V .
But, as ˆπ ∈Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν), we also have that (Xi,Ui)
⊥⊥
Xpai,Upai
(Ypai,Vpai), so Xi
⊥⊥
Xpai,Upai
(Zpai,Wpai).
Moreover, Xi
⊥⊥
Xpai
Upai (by independence of X and U) and Xi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Wpai
(R1∶n,Z1∶i−1,W1∶i−1) (from (12)), so the chain rule of conditional expectation implies
Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
(R1∶n,Z1∶i−1,W1∶i−1).
(13)
In particular, Xi
⊥⊥
R1∶n,Xpai
Ypai. Symmetrically, we get Yi
⊥⊥
R1∶n,Ypai
Xpai, which together
with the previously obtained (Xi,Yi)
⊥⊥
R1∶n,Xpai,Ypai
(X1∶i−1,Y1∶i−1) show that L(X,Y ∣R1∶n) is
G-bicausal by Proposition 4.7.
All that remains to be done is to determine the marginals. By (13), Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
R1∶n,X1∶i−1,
and so L(Xi ∣R1∶n,X1∶i−1) = L(Xi ∣Xpai) = µ
Xpai
i
. Thus, L(X ∣R1∶n) = µ. Symmetrically, we
see L(Y ∣R1∶n) = ν.
Thus, L(X,Y ∣R1∶n) ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν) and so
π = L(X,Y ) = ∫L(X,Y ∣R1∶n) dL(R1∶n) ∈conv (Πbc
G (µ,ν)).
Note that the result above does not imply that̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) is convex. Indeed, if G is the
graph on two independent nodes, then (see Theorem 4.22 and Proposition 4.7)̂
Πbc
G (µ1 ⊗µ2,ν1 ⊗ν2) = Πbc
G (µ1 ⊗µ2,ν1 ⊗ν2) = {π1 ⊗π2 ∣πi ∈Π(µi,νi)},
which is not convex in general, and we provide an explicit counterexample in Example 6.11.
As a consequence, the inclusion̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆conv (Πbc
G (µ,ν)) may be strict.
30


Step 3:̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) =̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν)
From the definition, it is clear that̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν) in general.
The converse is a
relatively straightforward consequence of the result in Step 1.
Let π ∈̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν). Then, by definition, there exists ˜π ∈Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν) such that π = projX×Y #˜π.
By Step 1, we know that Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν), so there exists ˆπ ∈TG (ˆˆµ, ˆˆν) such that
˜π = proj ˆ
X× ˆ
Y #ˆπ.
Composing the projections, we see π = projX×Y #ˆπ.
In other words, if
(X,U,U,Y,V,V) ∼ˆπ, then (X,Y ) ∼π and moreover the U1,...,Un,U1,...Un are indepen-
dent Unif[0,1], independent of X, the V1,...,Vn,V1,...Vn are independent Unif[0,1], in-
dependent of Y , and there exists a G-biadapted T ∶ˆˆX →ˆˆY such that (Y,V,V) = T(X,U,U).
Applying suitable variant of the isomorphism theorem for measure spaces, such as (Kechris,
1995, Theorem 17.41), gives us a measurable bijective function f ∶[0,1]2 →[0,1] such that
f #λ2 = λ, and we define ˜Ui ∶= f(Ui,Ui) and ˜Vi ∶= f(Vi,Vi). Moreover, define Φ ∶ˆˆX →ˆ
X
and Ψ ∶ˆˆY →ˆY via Φ(x,u,u) = (xi,f(ui,ui))1≤i≤n and Ψ(y,v,v) = (yi,f(vi,vi))1≤i≤n. Then
Φ and Ψ are G-biadapted with Φ#ˆˆµ = ˆµ and Ψ#ˆˆν = ˆν. Defining ˜T ∶= Ψ ○T ○Φ−1 ∶ˆ
X →ˆY,
˜T is G-biadapted by Lemma 4.16. It is now trivial to check that (Y, ˜V ) = ˜T(X, ˜U), with
(X, ˜U) ∼ˆµ and (Y, ˜V ) ∼ˆν, and hence conclude that π = L(X,Y ) ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν).
6.3
Proof of Theorem 3.2
Proof of Theorem 3.2. Recall Example 6.1 which showed the triangle inequality may fail for
Gchain. The converse statement then follows by observing that if G is not transitively closed,
then it has Gchain as a proper subgraph. Hence, we can extend our explicit counterexample
for Gchain to one for G by setting all random variables corresponding to nodes which do not
belong to the Gchain subgraph to be constant.
We move to the positive assertion. By Corollary 4.25, we can work with the representation
in (8). Non-negativity is clear since dX ≥0 and̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) ≠∅as the independent coupling
is always G-bicausal, see Proposition 4.7, and thus also lifted G-bicausal by Theorem 4.21.
The symmetry follows by the symmetry of lifted G-bicausal couplings: the pushforward of a
coupling in̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) under the map (x,y) ↦(y,x) is clearly in̂ Πbc
G (ν,µ). Thus, the only
non-trivial property is the triangle inequality, which can be proved using a classical gluing
argument as in (Villani, 2003, Theorem 7.3) by simply replacing the classical gluing lemma
(Villani, 2003, Lemma 7.6) with its lifted G-bicausal version, Lemma 6.6 below.
Lemma 6.6 (Lifted G-bicausal gluing lemma). Let µ,ν,η ∈PG
p (X), and π1 ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν),
π2 ∈̂ Πbc
G (ν,η). Then there exists π ∈P (X 3) such that its marginal on the first two coordinates
is π1, its marginal on the last two coordinates is π2, and π3, its marginal on the first and
third coordinates, has the property that π3 ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,η).
Proof. By definition, there exist G-biadapted maps T1,T2 ∶ˆ
X →ˆ
X such that T1#ˆµ = ˆν
and T2#ˆν = ˆη, with their induced Monge couplings ˆπ1 ∈TG (ˆµ, ˆν), ˆπ2 ∈TG (ˆν, ˆη) satisfying
projX×X #ˆπi = πi. Define ˆπ ∶= (Id,T1,T2 ○T1)#ˆµ and π ∶= projX×X×X #ˆπ. Then the marginal
of π on the first two coordinates is π1, and the marginal of π on the last two coordinates
is π2.
The marginal of π on the first and third coordinate is π3 ∶= projX×X #ˆπ3, where
ˆπ3 ∶= (Id,T2 ○T1)#ˆµ. As G is transitively closed, by Lemma 4.16, T2 ○T1 is G-biadapted.
Thus ˆπ3 ∈TG (ˆµ, ˆη) and π3 ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,η).
31


6.4
Proof of Theorem 3.8
It is well known that convergence in the classical p-Wasserstein distance is equivalent to
weak convergence plus convergence of pth moments (see (Villani, 2003, Theorem 7.12) for
a precise statement). Moreover, if the underlying metric is bounded, one can drop the pth
moment condition, and the Wasserstein topology is simply the topology of weak convergence.
Thus, if we denote by W p the p-Wasserstein distance induced by the metric d on X given by
d(x,y) ∶= d(x,y) ∧1, then W p metrizes weak convergence, and Wp convergence is equivalent
to W p convergence plus convergence of pth moments.
We prove a similar result for WG,p. For each i ∈V , define di(xi,yi) ∶= di(xi,yi)∧1, so that
di is a bounded metric on Xi inducing the same topology as di. Let d(x,y)p ∶= ∑n
i=1 di(xi,yi)p.
Then both d and d are bounded metrics on X (inducing the same topology as d) and we can
thus define their induced p-Wasserstein distances via
W G,p(µ,ν)p ∶=
inf
π∈Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫d(x,y)p dπ(x,y),
W G,p(µ,ν)p ∶=
inf
π∈Πbc
G (µ,ν)∫d(x,y)p dπ(x,y),
for all µ,ν ∈PG (X). By Theorem 3.2, W G,p, W G,p are metrics on PG (X), and hence also
on its subspace PG
p (X) (which is still defined with respect to the original metric d).
Proposition 6.7. For a sequence (µ(m))m≥1 in PG
p (X), and ν ∈PG
p (X), the following are
equivalent:
1. WG,p(µ(m),ν) →0 as m →∞;
2. W G,p(µ(m),ν) →0 and ∫d(x, ˜x)p dµ(m)(x) →∫d(x, ˜x)p dν(x), as m →∞for some
(and hence all) ˜x ∈X;
3. W G,p(µ(m),ν) →0 and ∫d(x, ˜x)p dµ(m)(x) →∫d(x, ˜x)p dν(x), as m →∞for some
(and hence all) ˜x ∈X.
Proof. Note d ≤d ≤d.
Hence, that 1) implies 3) implies 2) is trivial after noting that
WG,p convergence is stronger than Wp convergence, which implies the moment condition by
(Villani, 2003, Theorem 7.12). The proof that 2) implies 1) is essentially the same as that
of the iii) implies i) direction of (Villani, 2003, Theorem 7.12), with the minor difference of
having to use ε-optimal couplings instead of optimal couplings for W G,p because of possible
lack of attainment of the optimal cost.
Lemma 6.8. For 1 ≤p ≤q, we have that WG,p(µ,ν) ≤WG,q(µ,ν),∀µ,ν ∈PG
q (X).
If
moreover the space (X,d) is bounded, then WG,p(µ,ν) ≤diam(X)
p−1
p WG,1(µ,ν)
1
p ,∀µ,ν ∈
PG (X), and thus all WG,p metrics induce the same topology on PG (X).
Proof. Follows analogously to the corresponding result for classical Wasserstein distances,
see e.g. (Santambrogio, 2015, Section 5.1), together with the equivalence for all p ≥1 of the
metrics (∑n
i=1 di(xi,yi)p)
1
p (in analogy to equivalence of lp norms on Rn).
We can now prove Theorem 3.8.
32


Proof of Theorem 3.8. We need to show that for a sequence (µ(m))m≥1 in PG
p (X), and ν ∈
PG
p (X), WG,p(µ(m),ν) →0 as m →∞if and only if AWp(µ(m),ν) →0 as m →∞.
We assume without loss of generality (via a possible relabelling) that G is sorted. By
Proposition 6.7 applied to both G and the linear graph Gn = {(i,j)∣1 ≤i < j ≤n}, we see it
is enough to show that W G,p(µ(m),ν) →0 as m →∞if and only if AW p(µ(m),ν) →0 as
m →∞, where we use the notation AW p for W Gn,p (since AWp = WGn,p). Moreover, since d
is bounded, by Lemma 6.8 it is enough to prove this for p = 1.
That W G,1 convergence implies AW 1 convergence follows trivially since G-bicausality is
a stronger condition than Gn-bicausality, and thus AW 1 ≤W G,1. It remains to prove that if
AW 1(µ(m),ν) →0 then W G,1(µ(m),ν) →0 as m →∞.
The proof proceeds by induction on n, the number of nodes of G. If n = 1, WG,1 = W1 =
AW1 and there is nothing to prove. For n > 1, assume the result has been shown for all
transitively closed DAGs with at most n −1 nodes and let ˜G ∶= G1∶n−1.
Let ε > 0. By Lusin’s Theorem (Santambrogio, 2015, Box 1.6) applied to the function
f given by y1∶n−1 ∈X1∶n−1 ↦ν
ypan
n
∈P (Xn), there exists a compact set Kε ⊆X1∶n−1 with
ν1∶n−1(Kc
ε) ≤ε such that f∣Kε is uniformly continuous. Thus, there exists a δ > 0 such that
whenever y1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1 ∈Kε are such that ∑n−1
i=1 di(yi, ˜yi) ≤δ then W 1(ν
ypan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
) ≤ε (where
W 1 here is the 1-Wasserstein distance with respect to the metric dn on Xn).
Note that node n has no children by the sorted assumption, and thus µ(m)
1∶n−1 ∈P ˜
G (X1∶n−1),
ν1∶n−1 ∈P ˜
G (X1∶n−1), and whenever π ∈Πbc
G (µ(m),ν) then π1∶n−1 ∈Πbc
˜
G (µ(m)
1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1). Conse-
quently, AW 1(µ(m)
1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1) ≤AW 1(µ(m),ν), and so AW 1(µ(m)
1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1) →0 as m →∞. By
the induction hypothesis, this implies W ˜
G,1(µ(m)
1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1) →0 as m →∞. So, there exists a
sequence ˜π(m) ∈Πbc
˜
G (µ(m)
1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1) and M1 ≥1 such that for all m ≥M1
∫
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi, ˜yi)d˜π(m)(x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) ≤min(ε,εδ
2).
(14)
Furthermore, as AW 1(µ(m),ν) →0, using the DPP for adapted Wasserstein distances
(Backhoff et al., 2017, Proposition 5.2), there exists a sequence π(m) ∈Πbc (µ(m)
1∶n−1,ν1∶n−1)
and M2 ≥1 such that for all m ≥M2
∫
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi,yi) + W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
ypan
n
)dπ(m)(x1∶n−1,y1∶n−1) ≤min(ε,εδ
2).
(15)
Let M ∶= max(M1,M2) and fix m ≥M.
By inequalities above, the set Aε ∶= {(x1∶n−1,y1∶n−1) ∈X 2
1∶n−1 ∣∑n−1
i=1 di(xi,yi) ≤δ
2} has
π(m)(Ac
ε) ≤ε and ˜π(m)(Ac
ε) ≤ε.
Let ˆπ(m) ∈P (X 3
1∶n−1) be the gluing of π(m) and ˜π(m) along their common µ(m)
1∶n−1 marginal,
so that if (Y1∶n−1,X1∶n−1, ˜Y1∶n−1) ∼ˆπ(m) then (X1∶n−1,Y1∶n−1) ∼π(m), (X1∶n−1, ˜Y1∶n−1) ∼˜π(m).
Define the set
Bε ∶= {(y1∶n−1,x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) ∈Kε × X1∶n−1 × Kε ∣
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi,yi) ≤δ
2,
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi, ˜yi) ≤δ
2}.
Then (y1∶n−1,x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) ∈X 3
1∶n−1 ∖Bε if and only if one of y1∶n−1 ∈Kc
ε, ˜y1∶n−1 ∈Kc
ε,
(x1∶n−1,y1∶n−1) ∈Ac
ε, or (x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) ∈Ac
ε holds.
As π(m)(Ac
ε) ≤ε, ˜π(m)(Ac
ε) ≤ε, and
ν1∶n−1(Kc
ε) ≤ε, we see ˆπ(m)(Bc
ε) ≤4ε. Moreover, for (y1∶n−1,x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) ∈Bε, it holds that
33


∑n−1
i=1 di(yi, ˜yi) ≤δ and y1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1 ∈Kε, so W 1(ν
ypan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
) ≤ε. Therefore,
∣∫W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
ypan
n
)dπ(m) −∫W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
)d˜π(m)∣
= ∣∫W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
ypan
n
) −W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
)dˆπ(m)(y1∶n−1,x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1)∣
≤∫∣W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
ypan
n
) −W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
)∣dˆπ(m)(y1∶n−1,x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1)
≤∫W 1(ν
ypan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
)dˆπ(m)(y1∶n−1,x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) ≤ˆπ(m)(Bc
ε) + ε ≤5ε.
Combining this with (14) and (15), we see
W G,1(µ(m),ν) ≤∫
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi, ˜yi) + W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
)d˜π(m)(x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1)
≤∫
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi, ˜yi)d˜π(m)(x1∶n−1, ˜y1∶n−1) + ∫W 1(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
ypan
n
)dπ(m) + 5ε ≤7ε,
where the first inequality holds by considering the coupling which combines ˜π(m) with mea-
surably selected optimal couplings (Villani, 2009, Corollary 5.22) in Π(µ
(m)xpan
n
,ν
˜ypan
n
). As
ε > 0 was fixed arbitrarily, the result follows.
6.5
Proof of Theorem 4.11
We define a set of operations on graphs which we will use in the reminder of the text.
Definition 6.9. Let G = (V,E) be a directed graph, and A ⊆V . We write GA for the
subgraph of G given by (A,E ∩(A × A)).
Moreover, the graph G+ is defined as the directed graph with vertex set V ∪{∗}, where ∗
is some vertex label that is not already in V , and edge set
E ∪{(i,∗)∣i ∈V }.
When V = {1,...,n}, we canonically pick the label ∗to be n + 1.
Let G1 = (V1,E1), G2 = (V2,E2) be directed graphs.
Through a relabelling, we may
assume without loss of generality that V1 and V2 are disjoint. We define their disjoint union
graph G1 ⊕G2 as the directed graph with vertex set V1 ∪V2 and edge set E1 ∪E2.
We begin with some examples of graphs without the causal gluing property.
In our
examples, we choose Xi = Yi = Zi = R for all i = 1,2,3, but they can easily be adapted to any
choice of state spaces, as long as each of them consists of at least 2 distinct elements.
Example 6.10. The graph Gchain ∶= ({1,2,3},{(1,2),(2,3)}) does not have the bicausal
gluing property:
Let µ = η = 1
4 ∑4
i=1 δx(i), where x(1) = (0,0,0), x(2) = (0,0,1), x(3) = (1,0,0), x(4) = (1,0,1).
Let ν = 1
4 ∑4
i=1 δy(i), where y(1) = (0,1,0), y(2) = (0,1,1), y(3) = x(3), y(4) = x(4). Then µ,ν,η
are Gchain-compatible.
Let X ∼µ and define Y = (X1,1 −X1,X3), Z = (Y1,0,1Y2=Y3). Moreover, X = (Y1,0,Y3),
and Y = (Z1,1−Z1,Z31Y2=1+(1−Z3)1Y2=0). Then Y ∼ν, Z ∼η, and clearly L(X,Y ), L(Y,Z)
are Gchain-bicausal. However, as X2 = Z2 = 0, X1 ⊥⊥X3 and Z3 = X31X1=0 + (1 −X3)1X1=1,
we do not have that Z3
⊥⊥
X3,X2,Z2 (X,Z1∶2). Informally, going through Y allows us to store
information about X1 in Y2, which we then use in Z3. Thus, L(X,Z) = L(X,Y ) ○g L(Y,Z)
is not Gchain-bicausal.
34


Example 6.11. The graph Gsplit ∶= ({1,2,3},{(1,2),(1,3)}) does not have the bicausal
gluing property:
Let P ∶= 1
2(δ0 + δ1). We define measures via their disintegrations µ = η ∶= δ0 ⊗P ⊗P,
ν ∶= P ⊗P ⊗P. They are all Gsplit-compatible.
For q ∈[0,0.5], we define πq ∶= q(δ(0,0) + δ(1,1)) + (0.5 −q)(δ(0,1) + δ(1,0)).
Note that
π0.5 = (Id,Id)#P. Clearly, Π(P,P) = {πq ∣q ∈[0,0.5]}.
Fix q1 = q2 = 0.25,q3 = q4 = 0.2. By Proposition 4.7, the coupling
P ∶= 1
2δ(0,0) ⊗πq1 ⊗πq2 + 1
2δ(0,1) ⊗πq3 ⊗πq4 ∈P (
3
∏
i=1
(Xi × Yi)),
which via the appropriate reordering we view as a measure on P (X × Y), is in Πbc
Gsplit (µ,ν).
Similarly,
Q ∶= 1
2δ(0,0) ⊗π0.5 ⊗π0.5 + 1
2δ(1,0) ⊗π0.5 ⊗π0.5 ∈P (
3
∏
i=1
(Yi × Zi))
is in Πbc
Gsplit (ν,η). However,
P ○g Q = δ(0,0) ⊗(1
2πq1 ⊗πq2 + 1
2πq3 ⊗πq4) ∈P (
3
∏
i=1
(Xi × Zi))
is not in Πbc
Gsplit (µ,η), as all such Gsplit-bicausal couplings must, by Proposition 4.7, be of
the form δ(0,0) ⊗πq5 ⊗πq6, for some q5,q6 ∈[0,0.5], and one can check that there are no
q5,q6 such that 1
2πq1 ⊗πq2 + 1
2πq3 ⊗πq4 = πq5 ⊗πq6. Thus, what fails is the fact that the set
{α ⊗β ∣α,β ∈Π(P,P)} is not convex.
The examples above can be extended via the following result to any G which has Gchain
or Gsplit as a substructure, i.e., which either is not transitively closed or contains a split.
Proposition 6.12. Suppose that for some non-empty subset A ⊆V , the graph GA does not
satisfy the bicausal gluing property. Then G does not satisfy the bicausal gluing property.
Proof. This is a simple consequence of the fact that if X = (Xv)v∈V ,Y = (Yv)v∈V are random
variables such that Xv, Yv are constant for all v ∈V ∖A, then L(X,Y ) is G-causal if and
only if L(XA,YA) is GA-causal. This is easy to check from Definition 4.3.
Hence, we now focus on transitively closed DAGs without splits.
Lemma 6.13. Suppose a transitively closed DAG G contains no splits.
Then it can be
constructed from elementary graphs with just one node using the operations (⋅)+ and ⊕given
in Definition 6.9.
Proof. We proceed by induction on the number of nodes of G. If G is itself a graph with one
node then the statement is trivial.
Suppose now the statement holds for all DAGs with at most n ≥1 nodes, and assume G
has n + 1 nodes. Then, as no cycles are allowed, G must have a node x with no children.
If i,j ∈V ∖{x} are such that i is a parent of j, then we must have that either i,j ∈pax
or i,j ∈pac
x. Indeed, if j ∈pax then by transitive closure i ∈pax. Otherwise, if j ∈pac
x and
i ∈pax, then i,j,x form a split (c.f., Definition 4.10), contradicting our assumption.
Hence, G can be constructed as (G+
pax)⊕GV ∖(pax∪{x}), where both Gpax and GV ∖(pax∪{x})
have at most n nodes, are transitively closed and have no splits.
35


Clearly, if G is a graph with just one node, G has the causal gluing property since
Πc
G (µ,ν) = Π(µ,ν) in that case. We now show that we can construct graphs with the causal
gluing property from other graphs with this property via the two operations in Lemma 6.13.
Proposition 6.14. Suppose the DAG G has the causal gluing property. Then so does G+.
Proof. We assume without loss of generality, via a relabelling, that G is a sorted DAG with
V = {1,...,n}. Then, by our convention in Definition 6.9, G+ has vertex set V ∪{n + 1} and
edge set E ∪(V × {n + 1}).
Let µ+ ∈PG+ (X1∶n+1), ν+ ∈PG+ (Y1∶n+1), η+ ∈PG+ (Z1∶n+1), π+ ∈Πc
G+ (µ+,ν+), ˜π+ ∈
Πc
G+ (ν+,η+). We define µ ∶= projX1∶n#µ+, π ∶= projX1∶n×Y1∶n#π+, with similar definitions for
ν,η, ˜π. Note that π ∈Πc
G (µ,ν), ˜π ∈Πc
G (ν,η) by Proposition A.1.
Let (X,Y,Z) ∼π+ ˙⊗˜π+. Then (X,Z) ∼π+ ○g ˜π+, and we want to show Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Xi,Xpai
(Z1∶i−1,X) for all 1 ≤i ≤n + 1. The case i = n + 1 is trivial since pan+1 = {1,...,n}.
By Proposition A.3, (X1∶n,Y1∶n,Z1∶n) ∼π ˙⊗˜π. In particular, (X1∶n,Z1∶n) ∼π ○g ˜π, which is
in Πc
G (µ,η) since G has the causal gluing property. Thus, Zi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xpai,Zpai
(Z1∶i−1,X1∶n) for
1 ≤i ≤n. By the chain rule of conditional independence (Kallenberg, 2021, Theorem 8.12) it
is enough to show Zi
⊥⊥
X1∶n,Z1∶i−1 Xn+1 for all 1 ≤i ≤n. Applying the chain rule again, this is
equivalent to proving Z1∶n ⊥⊥
X1∶n Xn+1.
As (X,Y ) ∼π+ ∈Πc
G+ (µ+,ν+), we know Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xpai,Ypai
(Y1∶i−1,X) for all 1 ≤i ≤n. Hence,
Yi
⊥⊥
X1∶n,Y1∶i−1 Xn+1 for all 1 ≤i ≤n, which is equivalent to Y1∶n ⊥⊥
X1∶n Xn+1, where both statements
follow by the chain rule. Similarly, we obtain Z1∶n ⊥⊥
Y1∶n Yn+1.
By properties of ˙⊗, X ⊥⊥
Y Z. In particular, X ⊥⊥
Y Z1∶n. Combining this with Z1∶n ⊥⊥
Y1∶n Yn+1,
we see that (X,Yn+1) ⊥⊥
Y1∶n Z1∶n, so Xn+1
⊥⊥
X1∶n,Y1∶n Z1∶n, both using the chain rule .
This,
together with the fact that Y1∶n
⊥⊥
X1∶n Xn+1 gives us by one more application of the chain
rule that Xn+1 ⊥⊥
X1∶n (Y1∶n,Z1∶n), so in particular Xn+1 ⊥⊥
X1∶n Z1∶n, which is what we needed to
show.
Proposition 6.15. Suppose the DAGs G1,G2 have the causal gluing property. Then so does
G1 ⊕G2.
Proof. We may assume without loss of generality via a relabelling that G1, G2 are sorted and
have vertex sets A ∶= {1,...,n1}, and B ∶= {n1 + 1,...,n1 + n2} respectively. Let Ei denote
the edge set of graph Gi. Then, we may write G1 ⊕G2 = (A ∪B,E1 ∪E2).
Let µ ∈PG1⊕G2 (XA∪B), ν ∈PG1⊕G2 (YA∪B), η ∈PG1⊕G2 (ZA∪B), π ∈Πc
G1⊕G2 (µ,ν),
˜π ∈Πc
G1⊕G2 (ν,η). We define µ1 ∶= projXA#µ, µ2 ∶= projXB #µ, π1 ∶= projXA×YA#π, π2 ∶=
projXB×YB #π, with corresponding definitions for νi,ηi, ˜πi. Note that πi ∈Πc
Gi (µi,νi), ˜πi ∈
Πc
Gi (νi,ηi) by Proposition A.1.
Let (X,Y,Z) ∼π ˙⊗˜π. Then (X,Z) ∼π○g ˜π, and we want to show Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Xi,Xpai
(Z1∶i−1,X)
for all i ∈A ∪B.
Note that by construction of G1 ⊕G2, and the fact that µ,ν,η are G1 ⊕G2-compatible
and π, ˜π are G1 ⊕G2-causal, we see that
(XA,YA,ZA) ⊥⊥(XB,YB,ZB).
(16)
36


Let i ∈A. By Proposition A.3, (XA,YA,ZA) ∼π1 ˙⊗˜π1. As G1 has the causal gluing
property, this means (XA,ZA) ∼π1 ○g ˜π1 ∈Πc
G1 (µ1,η1).
Thus, we know Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Xi,Xpai
(Z1∶i−1,XA). By (16), (XA,Z1∶i) ⊥⊥XB, which in turn implies that also Zi
⊥⊥
Z1∶i−1,XA XB.
Combining these via the chain rule of conditional independence (Kallenberg, 2021, Theorem
8.12) gives us that Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Xi,Xpai
(Z1∶i−1,XA,XB), which is what we wanted. Importantly,
we used the fact that pai ⊆{1,...,i −1} ⊆A.
Now fix i ∈B. As above, by Proposition A.3 we obtain Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Xi,Xpai
(Zn1+1∶i−1,XB). By
(16), (XA,ZA) ⊥⊥XB,Zn1+1∶i, which in particular implies that also Zi
⊥⊥
Zn1+1∶i−1,XB (XA,ZA).
Finally, applying the chain rule to these two independence relations, we obtain the desired re-
sult: Zi
⊥⊥
Zpai,Xi,Xpai
(ZA,Zn1+1∶i−1,XA,XB) = (Z1∶i−1,X). Again, the key to this application
of the chain rule is the fact that pai ⊆{n1 + 1,...,i −1} ⊆B.
We now have all the tools to prove Theorem 4.11.
Proof of Theorem 4.11. As in Remark 4.12, we already know that 1) ⇒2). Examples 6.10,
6.11, show, via Proposition 6.12, that 2) ⇒3). Finally, as the graph with one node clearly
has the causal gluing property, Lemma 6.13 and Propositions 6.14 and 6.15 imply that 3) ⇒
1).
6.6
Proof of Theorem 4.22
Proof of Theorem 4.22. That the inclusion Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) may be strict when G has
a split follows by the example below.
Example 6.16. Let U1,U2,U3 ∼Unif[0,1] and X2,X3 ∼1
2(δ0 + δ1) be independent random
variables. Let Yi ∶= 1U1≥0.5Xi+1U1<0.5(1−Xi) for i ∈{2,3}. Then π ∶= L((0,X2,X3),(0,Y2,Y3))
is not in Πbc
Gsplit (µ,µ) for µ ∶= L(0,X2,X3) = L(0,Y2,Y3) ∈PGsplit (R3), as (X3,Y3) is not
independent of (X2,Y2).
Let T ∶(R × [0,1])3 →(R × [0,1])3 be given by T((xi,ui))1≤i≤3 = ((x1,u1),(1u1≥0.5x2 +
1u1<0.5(1 −x2),u2),(1u1≥0.5x3 + 1u1<0.5(1 −x3),u3)). T is Gsplit-biadapted and it easy to
see that T((0,U1),(X2,U2),(X3,U3)) = ((0,U1),(Y2,U2),(Y3,U3)). Noting that U1∶3 is in-
dependent of Y2,Y3, we see that T #ˆµ = ˆµ and thus π ∈̂ Πbc
Gsplit (µ,µ).
Example 6.17 below shows that when G contains a split Πbc
G (µ,ν) may not be weakly
closed.
Example 6.17. Consider the graph Gsplit, with vertices {1,2,3} and edges {(1,2),(1,3)}.
Let P ∶= 1
2 (δ−1 + δ1), λ denote the uniform measure on [0,1], and µ ∶= λ⊗P ⊗P ∈PGsplit (R3).
Let (X1,X2,X3,Z) ∼µ ⊗P.
For k ≥3 define Y (k)
1
∶= frac(X1 + 1
kZ) and Yi ∶= ZXi
for i = 2,3, where by frac(x) we mean the fractional part of x, namely x −⌊x⌋. Note that
L(Y (k)
1
,Y2,Y3) = µ and σ (X1,Y (k)
1
) = σ (X1,Z). Thus, it is easy to see that
L((X1,X2,X3),(Y (k)
1
,Y2,Y3)) ∈Πbc
Gsplit (µ,µ).
However, as k →∞, the law above converges weakly to L((X1,X2,X3),(X1,Y2,Y3)),
which is not Gsplit-bicausal, as (X2,Y2) is not conditionally independent from (X3,Y3) given
(X1,X1). Thus, Πbc
Gsplit (µ,µ) is not weakly closed.
37


This example may be extended to any DAG which has a split, i.e., has Gsplit as a proper
subgraph, by adding in constant random variables for all other nodes in the graph. In a
similar way, the counterexample in (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Proposition 3.6(iv)) for
Gchain can be extended to any DAG which is not transitively closed, thus showing Πbc
G (µ,ν)
is not weakly closed in general for such DAGs.
We now show that Πbc
G (µ,ν) =̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) and is weakly closed if G contains no splits (and
is transitively closed). We may assume without loss of generality that G is sorted.
To show that Πbc
G (µ,ν) is weakly closed we use the characterisation of graph bicausality
from point 2) of Proposition 4.7. Let (L(X(k),Y (k)))k≥1 be a sequence in Πbc
G (µ,ν) converg-
ing weakly to some L(X,Y ) ∈P (X × Y). We first note that Π(µ,ν) is weakly closed and
thus L(X,Y ) ∈Π(µ,ν). By Proposition 4.7 2), we know that for 2 ≤i ≤n:
(X(k)
i
,Y (k)
i
)
⊥⊥
X(k)
pai,Y (k)
pai
(X(k)
1∶i−1,Y (k)
1∶i−1),
X(k)
i
⊥⊥
X(k)
pai
Y (k)
pai ,
Y (k)
i
⊥⊥
Y (k)
pai
X(k)
pai .
The first set of conditional independence relations above imply by Proposition 4.1 that
L((X(k)
i
,Y (k)
i
)i∈V ) is G-compatible (here we associate to each node i the random variable
(X(k)
i
,Y (k)
i
)).
Since G is transitively closed and contains no splits, by Proposition 4.13
the set PG ((Xi,Yi)i∈V ) is weakly closed, and thus contains L((Xi,Yi)i∈V ), implying that
(Xi,Yi)
⊥⊥
Xpai,Ypai
(X1∶i−1,Y1∶i−1) for 2 ≤i ≤n.
The second and third sets of conditional independence relations above are equivalent to
saying that L((X(k)
pai ,X(k)
i
),(Y (k)
pai ,Y (k)
i
)) are (G2)-bicausal couplings of L((X(k)
pai ,X(k)
i
))
and L((Y (k)
pai ,Y (k)
i
)) viewed as 2-step stochastic processes for all 2 ≤i ≤n. However, the
sets Πbc
G2 (µ{i}∪pai,ν{i}∪pai) are weakly closed by (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Proposition 3.4), see
also Beiglb¨ock and Lacker (2018). Thus, we obtain that the same conditional independence
relations hold in the limit for 2 ≤i ≤n: Xi ⊥⊥
Xpai
Ypai,Yi ⊥⊥
Ypai
Xpai.
We conclude via Proposition 4.7 2) that L(X,Y ) ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν), and so Πbc
G (µ,ν) is weakly
closed.
The proof that Πbc
G (µ,ν) =̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) now proceeds similarly to the proof of Theorem 4.11.
Clearly, the result is true if G is the graph with just one node. We can now use induction via
Lemma 6.13 by noting the following two facts:
First, it is easy to see, for any two DAGs G1,G2 and µi,νi Gi-compatible measures,
that Πbc
G1⊕G2 (µ1 ⊗µ2,ν1 ⊗ν2) is equal to the set Πbc
G1 (µ1,ν1) ⊗Πbc
G2 (µ2,ν2), and the set̂
Πbc
G1⊕G2 (µ1 ⊗µ2,ν1 ⊗ν2) is equal to the set̂ Πbc
G1 (µ1,ν1) ⊗̂ Πbc
G2 (µ2,ν2) (modulo a reorder-
ing of the variables).
So, if̂ Πbc
Gi (µi,νi) = Πbc
Gi (µi,νi), then̂ Πbc
G1⊕G2 (µ1 ⊗µ2,ν1 ⊗ν2) =
Πbc
G1⊕G2 (µ1 ⊗µ2,ν1 ⊗ν2).
Secondly, any π ∈̂ Πbc
G+ (µ+,ν+) for µ+ ∈PG+ (X1∶n+1),ν+ ∈PG+ (Y1∶n+1) can be dis-
integrated as π(dx1∶n+1,dy1∶n+1) = π1∶n(dx1∶n,dy1∶n) ⊗πx1∶n,y1∶n
n+1
(dxn+1,dyn+1) with π1∶n ∈̂
Πbc
G (µ+
1∶n,ν+
1∶n) and πx1∶n,y1∶n
n+1
(dxn+1,dyn+1) ∈Π(µ+,x1∶n
n+1
,ν+,y1∶n
n+1
) π-a.s.
To see this, let ˆπ ∈
TG+ (ˆµ+, ˆν+) be such that π is the marginal of ˆπ on the X1∶n+1 × Y1∶n+1 space.
When
(X1∶n+1,U1∶n+1,Y1∶n+1,V1∶n+1) ∼ˆπ, then by the definition of G+-biadapted maps,
L(X1∶n,U1∶n,Y1∶n,V1∶n) ∈TG (ˆµ+
1∶n, ˆν+
1∶n),
and so L(X1∶n,Y1∶n) ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ+
1∶n,ν+
1∶n). Moreover, L(Xn+1,Yn+1 ∣X1∶n,Y1∶n) is equal to
E[L(Xn+1,Yn+1 ∣X1∶n,U1∶n,Y1∶n,V1∶n) ∣X1∶n,Y1∶n] ∈Π(µ+,X1∶n
n+1
,ν+,Y1∶n
n+1
),
38


since L(Xn+1,Yn+1 ∣X1∶n,U1∶n,Y1∶n,V1∶n) ∈Π(µ+,X1∶n
n+1
,ν+,Y1∶n
n+1
) (by independence of U from X,
and V from Y ), which is weakly closed and convex. Thus, by Proposition 4.7, we see that if̂
Πbc
G (µ+
1∶n,ν+
1∶n) = Πbc
G (µ+
1∶n,ν+
1∶n), then̂ Πbc
G+ (µ+,ν+) = Πbc
G+ (µ+,ν+).
6.7
Proof of Theorem 4.18
This section closely follows Beiglb¨ock et al. (2025).
We adapt their proof that couplings
generated by biadapted Monge maps are dense in the set of bicausal couplings into a proof
of the denseness of couplings generated by G-biadapted Monge maps in the set of lifted G-
bicausal couplings. The extra difficulty added by the graph structure is handled by a more
technical argument in Proposition 6.18 and by inducting by adding leaf nodes, back to front,
as opposed to front to back in time as in Beiglb¨ock et al. (2025).
Since the sets TG (µ,ν) and Πbc
G (µ,ν) are invariant under relabelling, without any loss of
generality, throughout this section, we assume G is sorted and when µ satisfies Assumption
4.17 it does so with respect to this ordering. In addition, we consider the metric on X given
by d(x,y) ∶= ∑n
i=1 di(xi,yi) for metrics di on Xi metrising the topologies of Xi and which we
assume to be bounded above by 1. This metric d then metrises the product topology of X.
Under this assumption, the following result about perturbations of a probability measure into
its lifted version holds.
Proposition 6.18. Suppose µ satisfies Assumption 4.17 and G is transitively closed. Then
for any ε > 0 there exists a G-biadapted map T ∶X →ˆ
X such that T #µ =̂ µ and
∫d(x,projX (T(x)))dµ(x) ≤ε.
Proof. We again proceed by induction on the number of nodes n of the graph G. If n = 1,
this follows from (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Lemma 3.9).
For n > 1 assume the result holds for all graphs with at most n −1 nodes. Assuming
without loss of generality via a relabelling that G is sorted, let ˜G ∶= G1∶n−1. In particular, the
result holds for ˜G. Fix ε > 0.
Let f ∶Xpan →P (Xn) be the measurable function given by the disintegration xpan ↦
µ
xpan
n
. We endow P (Xn) with the 1-Wasserstein metric W1 induced by dn, under which it
becomes a Polish space. We can thus apply Lusin’s Theorem (Santambrogio, 2015, Box 1.6)
to obtain a compact set K ⊆Xpan such that µpan(Kc) ≤ε and f∣K is uniformly continuous.
Thus, there exists a δ > 0 such that W1(f(xpan),f(ypan)) ≤ε whenever xpan,ypan ∈K and
∑i∈pan di(xi,yi) ≤δ. We may choose δ ≤1.
By the induction hypothesis, there exists ˜T ∶X1∶n−1 →ˆ
X1∶n−1 a ˜G-biadapted map such
that ˜T #µ1∶n−1 =̂ µ1∶n−1 and
∫
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi,projXi( ˜Ti(xi,xpai)))dµ1∶n−1(x1∶n−1) ≤δε ≤ε.
In particular, this implies that µpan(A) ≤ε for the set
A ∶=
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
xpan ∈Xpan
RRRRRRRRRRR
∑
i∈pan
di(xi,projXi( ˜Ti(xi,xpai))) > δ
⎫⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎭
.
Now, as G is transitively closed, we may define the map ˜Tpan ∶Xpan →ˆ
Xpan given by
(xi)i∈pan ↦( ˜Ti(xi,xpai))i∈pan. Since ˜T #µ1∶n−1 =̂ µ1∶n−1 transitive closure implies ˜Tpan#µpan =̂
µpan. Thus, for B ∶= ˜T −1
pan(Kc × [0,1]∣pan∣) we have
µpan(B) = µpan( ˜T −1
pan(Kc × [0,1]∣pan∣)) =̂ µpan(Kc × [0,1]∣pan∣) = µpan(Kc) ≤ε.
39


Using a measurable selection argument (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Proposition 7.50),
since we know Monge couplings are dense in the set of couplings Π(µ
xpan
n
,̂µn
˜Tpan(xpan)), we
may find a measurable map Tn ∶Xn × Xpan →ˆ
Xn such that T
xpan
n
is bijective, T
xpan
n
#µ
xpan
n
=̂
µn
˜Tpan(xpan), and
∫dn(xn,projXn(T
xpan
n
(xn)))dµ
xpan
n
(xn) ≤W1 (µ
xpan
n
,µ
˜Tpan(xpan)
n
) + ε.
The key to our construction so far is that for xpan ∈K ∩Ac ∩Bc,
W1 (µ
xpan
n
,µ
˜Tpan(xpan)
n
) ≤ε.
Thus, if we define T ∶X →ˆ
X via T(x) = ( ˜T(x1∶n−1),Tn(xn,xpan)), T is G-biadapted by
Lemma 6.5, T #µ =̂ µ, and
∫
n
∑
i=1
di(xi,projXi(T
xpai
i
(xi)))dµ(x) = ∫
n−1
∑
i=1
di(xi,projXi( ˜T
xpai
i
(xi)))dµ1∶n−1(x1∶n−1)
+ ∬dn(xn,projXn(T
xpan
n
(xn)))dµ
xpan
n
(xn)dµpan(xpan)
≤ε + µpan(K ∩Ac ∩Bc) ⋅2ε + µpan((K ∩Ac ∩Bc)c) ⋅1 ≤ε + 2ε + 3ε = 6ε.
As ε > 0 was fixed arbitrarily, the result follows.
µ
ν
Tm
π
ˆµ
ˆν
ˆT
ϕm
ψ−1
m
Figure 6.1: A visual diagram of the proof of Theorem 4.18.
Proof of Theorem 4.18. By Theorem 4.21, Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν), thus we may assume more
generally that π ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Equipped with Proposition 6.18, the proof can now follow
analogously to the proof of (Beiglb¨ock et al., 2025, Theorem 3.11), but using the defining
property of a lifted G-bicausal coupling. Hence, we only sketch the idea of the proof, as
illustrated in Figure 6.1.
Let m ≥1.
By the definition of lifted G-bicausality, there exists a G-biadapted map
ˆT ∶ˆ
X →ˆY such that ˆT #ˆµ = ˆν and the projection of its induced Monge coupling onto X ×Y is
π. Let ϕm,ψm be the G-biadapted perturbation maps obtained from Proposition 6.18 with
ε = 1
m for µ and ν respectively. Then, if we define Tm ∶= ψ−1
m ○ˆT ○ϕm, by Lemma 4.16 as G
is transitively closed, Tm is G-biadapted. As the Monge coupling induced by ˆT projects to
π, and the perturbations given by ϕm,ψm can be made arbitrarily small as m →∞, one can
show that the Monge maps induced by the Tm approximate π as m →∞.
Remark 6.19. Note that the proof above shows that one could have in fact replaced
Πbc
G (µ,ν) bŷ Πbc
G (µ,ν) in the statement of Theorem 4.18 to obtain that TG (µ,ν) is weakly
dense in̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν).
40


6.8
Proof of Dynamic Programming Principle Results
DPP Compatible Graphs
We begin with a further discussion of our definition of a perfect DAG in Definition 2.1 and
by proving Propostion 5.2. In (Lauritzen, 2026, Section 2.1), the notion of a perfect DAG
G is defined via the notion of moralisation. For a DAG G, we may define its moral graph
Gm to be the undirected graph with the same vertex set V as G, which has an edge between
i ≠j ∈V if and only if i is a parent of j, j is a parent of i, or there exists a k ∈V such that
i,j ∈pak. If the third condition adds no new edges to Gm other than those added by the
first two conditions, G is said to be perfect. In other words a DAG G is perfect if whenever
i,j ∈pak with i ≠j then either i ∈paj or j ∈pai, or equivalently, if it has no merges. We now
establish the equivalent characterisation introduced in Section 5.
Proof of Proposition 5.2. To show that 2) implies 1), let i < j < k be such that i,j ∈pak.
Since, pak ⊆paprox(k) ∪{prox(k)}, and prox(k) is by definition the largest (with respect to
the sorted order) parent of k, we must have that either j = prox(k) and i ∈paprox(k) in which
case i is a parent of j, or both i and j are parents of prox(k) < k. One can then restart
this argument replacing k with prox(k). As every time k must decrease, we cannot iterate
indefinitely and thus must obtain that i is a parent of j after a finite number of steps.
Conversely, assume 1) holds and let k ∈V , and i ∈pak. Assume that i is not equal to
j ∶= prox(k) ∈pak. Then, by 1) we must have that i is a parent of j or j is a parent of i, as
otherwise (k,i,j) would be a merge. As j is the largest parent of k in the sorted order, we
cannot have that j ∈pai. Thus, i ∈paj = paprox(k). Therefore, pak ⊆paprox(k) ∪{prox(k)},
and 2) holds.
To better understand the structure of a perfect DAG, we associate to G its proximal
graph:
Definition 6.20 (Proximal graph). The proximal graph of G, prox(G), is defined as the
directed graph with vertex set V and edge set
prox(E) ∶= {(prox(i),i)∣i ∈V,pai ≠∅} ⊆E.
As G is sorted, prox(i) ≤i and the equality holds if and only if i has no parents. Thus,
prox(G) is acyclic and each of its vertices has at most one parent by definition. In other
words, prox(G) is a forest with edges directed from parents to their children.
Hence, if i is an ancestor of j in prox(G), there exists a unique directed path in prox(G)
from i to j, which we call the proximal path from i to j. Clearly, as the only possible parent
in prox(G) of a vertex v is prox(v), such a proximal path must take the form i = proxm(j) →
... →prox(j) →j for some m ≥1.
Moreover, for i ∈V we define its depth, depth(i) as the length of the path from the root
of the forest component of prox(G) containing i to the vertex i. Equivalently, depth(i) is the
smallest m ≥0 such that proxm(i) = proxm+1(i).
Figure 6.2 illustrates the concepts defined above.
41


G
Depth
0
1
2
3
prox(G)
Figure 6.2: Example of a DAG G and its associated proximal graph. prox(G) is annotated
with the depths of its vertices, and the proximal path from the blue vertex with a white
square to the orange vertex with a white star is highlighted in dashed yellow arrows.
Proposition 6.21. Let G be a sorted DAG. Then the following are equivalent:
1) G is perfect;
2) For all i,j ∈V such that i ∈paj, we have that i is an ancestor of j in prox(G) and
i ∈pav for all vertices v ≠i of the proximal path between i and j.
Proof. In this proof, we use the equivalent characterisation of a perfect DAG established in
Proposition 5.2.
Suppose G is perfect. We prove 2) by induction on the depth of j. If depth(j) = 0,
paj = ∅, so there is nothing to prove. Let n ≥1 and assume we have proved 2) for all i,j ∈V
with depth(j) ≤n −1.
Fix i,j ∈V such that depth(j) = n and i ∈paj. 1) then implies that i ∈paj ⊆paprox(j) ∪
{prox(j)}. If i = prox(j), then clearly the condition in 2) holds for the pair (i,j). Otherwise,
we must have that i ∈paprox(j). As depth(prox(j)) = n −1, by the induction hypothesis we
see then that i must be an ancestor of prox(j) in prox(G) and i ∈pav for all vertices v ≠i
of the proximal path between i and prox(j). But any prox(G) ancestor of prox(j) is also
an ancestor of j and the proximal path from i to j is formed by the vertices in the proximal
path from i to prox(j), and j. Thus 2) also holds for the pair (i,j) and the proof follows by
induction.
For the converse, fix j ∈V . If i ∈paj, then as prox(j) must always be on any proximal
path ending in j, 2) implies that either i = prox(j) or i is a parent in G of prox(j). Thus,
i ∈paprox(j) ∪{prox(j)}.
DPP for G-bicausal Transport
The proof is inspired by (Backhoff et al., 2017, Proposition 5.2).
Proof of Proposition 5.3. We begin by showing recursively that each V G,c
k
is well-defined and
lower semi-analytic (l.s.a.).
Let Dk denote the set
{(xpak,ypak,π) ∈Xpak × Ypak × P (Xk × Yk)∣π ∈Π(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
)},
and the function gk ∶Dk →R be defined as
gk(xpak,ypak,π) ∶= ∫fk(xpak,ypak,xk,yk)dπ(xk,yk),
42


where fk ∶Xpak × Ypak × Xk × Yk →R is given by
fk(xpak,ypak,xk,yk) ∶= ck(xk,xpak,yk,ypak) + ∑
i∈Ak
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai).
By Dk(xpak,ypak) we denote the fibre of the set Dk at (xpak,ypak), i.e., the set Π(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
) ⊆
P (Xk × Yk).
We first remark that the set Dk is Borel, thus analytic. Indeed, it is the preimage of the
closed (in the weak topology) set
{(˜µ, ˜ν,π) ∈P (Xk) × P (Yk) × P (Xk × Yk)∣π ∈Π(˜µ, ˜ν)}
under the Borel map (xpak,ypak,π) ↦(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
,π).
For notational convenience in the proof below, we define pan+1 ∶= ∅, An ∶= {n + 1} and
V G,c
n+1 ∶= 0 so that the recursive formula in the definition of V G,c
k
extends to the case k = n.
V G,c
n+1 is trivially well-defined and l.s.a.
Let 1 ≤k ≤n and suppose we have shown that V G,c
i
is well-defined and l.s.a. for all
k +1 ≤i ≤n+1. Fixing, i ∈Ak ⊆[k +1,n+1], V G,c
i
is l.s.a. as a map with domain Xpai ×Ypai.
As i ∈Ak, and G is perfect, pai ⊆pak ∪{k}. Thus, we may extend the domain of V G,c
i
to the product space Xpak × Ypak × Xk × Yk by composing it with the Borel projection map
(xpak,ypak,xk,yk) ↦(xpai,ypai). By (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Lemma 7.30(3)) the result
remains l.s.a. Now fk is defined as a sum of such functions and the l.s.a. function ck, so
it is l.s.a. by (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Lemma 7.30(4)). In particular, fk is universally
measurable so the integral gk is well-defined.
Applying (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Proposition 7.48) with X = Xpak×Ypak×P (Xk × Yk),
Y = Xk × Yk, the l.s.a.
map (xpak,ypak,π,xk,yk) ↦fk(xpak,ypak,xk,yk) and the Borel
stochastic kernel q on Y given X given by q(dxk,dyk ∣xpak,ypak,π) = π(dxk,dyk), we get
that gk is moreover l.s.a.
V G,c
k
(xpak,ypak) is the infimum of the function gk over the fibre Dk(xpak,ypak).
By
(Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Proposition 7.47), since Dk is analytic and gk is well-defined
and l.s.a., then so is V G,c
k
.
It now follows by induction that V G,c
k
is well-defined and l.s.a. for all 1 ≤k ≤n.
We now prove V G,c(µ,ν) = DPPG,c(µ,ν). Fix ε > 0.
For each 1 ≤k ≤n, as Dk is
analytic and gk is l.s.a., we can find by (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Proposition 7.50(b)) a
universally measurable selection of ε-minimisers for V G,c
k
i.e. a universally measurable map
φk,ε ∶Xpak ×Ypak →P (Xk × Yk) such that for all (xpak,ypak) ∈Xpak ×Ypak, φk,ε(xpak,ypak) ∈
Π(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
) and moreover
∫ck(xk,xpak,yk,ypak) + ∑
i∈Ak
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
(xk,yk) ≤
≤V G,c
k
(xpak,ypak) + ε,
where we have written φ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
instead of φk,ε(xpak,ypak), keeping with our conventions
for stochastic kernels. We do the same for ˜φk,ε introduced below.
The maps φk,ε can be trivially extended to stochastic kernels ˜φk,ε ∶X1∶k−1 × Y1∶k−1 →
P (Xk × Yk) such that ˜φk,ε(x1∶k−1,y1∶k−1) ∶= φk,ε(xpak,ypak), which inherit the property of
being universally measurable by (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Proposition 7.44).
By (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Proposition 7.45) we may now compose these stochastic
kernels to obtain a probability measure on P (X × Y) given by
πε(dx,dy) ∶=
n
⊗
k=1
˜φx1∶k−1,y1∶k−1
k,ε
(dxk,dyk) =
n
⊗
k=1
φ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
(dxk,dyk)
43


As it always holds that φ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
∈Π(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
), we see in fact that πε ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν), so
V G,c(µ,ν) ≤∫c(x,y)dπε(x,y)
(17)
= ∫c1 + (∫c2 + (... + (∫cn dφ
xpan,ypan
n,ε
)...) dφ
xpa2,ypa2
2,ε
) dφ1,ε.
Now define Ic
n(x1∶n−1,y1∶n−1) ∶= ∫cn dφ
xpan,ypan
n,ε
and recursively for 1 ≤k < n,
Ic
k(x1∶k−1,y1∶k−1) ∶= ∫ck + Ic
k+1(x1∶k,y1∶k)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
.
We aim to show inductively that Ic
k(x1∶k−1,y1∶k−1) ≤∑i∈Bk V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)+(n−k+1)ε, where
we defined the sets Bk ∶= {i ≥k ∣prox(i) < k orprox(i) = i}. Note that Bk+1 = Ak ∪(Bk ∖{k}).
The case for k = n is immediate from the definition of φn,ε as an ε-optimiser. Let 1 ≤k < n
and assume Ic
k+1(x1∶k,y1∶k) ≤∑i∈Bk+1 V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) + (n −k)ε. Then
Ic
k(x1∶k−1,y1∶k−1) = ∫ck + Ic
k+1(x1∶k,y1∶k)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
≤∫ck +
∑
i∈Bk+1
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
+ (n −k)ε
= ∫ck + ∑
i∈Ak
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
+
∑
i∈Bk∖{k}
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) + (n −k)ε
≤V G,c
k
(xpak,ypak) + ε +
∑
i∈Bk∖{k}
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) + (n −k)ε
= ∑
i∈Bk
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) + (n −k + 1)ε,
where the first inequality follows by the inductive hypothesis, the second equality since k ∉pai
when i ∈Bk ∖{k}, and the final equality by the choice of φk,ε as an ε-optimiser.
By induction then, using equation (17), we see
V G,c(µ,ν) ≤Ic
1 ≤∑
i∈B1
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) + nε = DPPG,c(µ,ν) + nε,
since i ∈B1 if and only if prox(i) = i, i.e., i ∈A0.
Hence, as ε was fixed arbitrarily, V G,c(µ,ν) ≤DPPG,c(µ,ν).
Conversely, for ε > 0, there exists πε ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν) such that ∫cdπε ≤V G,c(µ,ν) + ε. πε
may then be disintegrated as πε = ⊗n
k=1 φ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
(dxk,dyk) for some stochastic kernels with
φ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
∈Π(µ
xpak
k
,ν
ypak
k
). Using the same notation as above, one may similarly show by
induction that Ic
k(x1∶k−1,y1∶k−1) ≥∑i∈Bk V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai).
Indeed, the case k = n is trivial by optimality of V G,c
n
. Assuming the result has been
proved for k + 1, we see similarly as above
Ic
k(x1∶k−1,y1∶k−1) = ∫ck + Ic
k+1(x1∶k,y1∶k)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
≥∫ck +
∑
i∈Bk+1
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
= ∫ck + ∑
i∈Ak
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)dφ
xpak ,ypak
k,ε
+
∑
i∈Bk∖{k}
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai)
≥V G,c
k
(xpak,ypak) +
∑
i∈Bk∖{k}
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) = ∑
i∈Bk
V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai),
44


where the last inequality follows by optimality of V G,c
k
.
So, V G,c(µ,ν)+ε ≥∫cdπε = Ic
1 ≥∑i∈B1 V G,c
i
(xpai,ypai) = DPPG,c(µ,ν). Take ε ↘0 to see
V G,c(µ,ν) ≥DPPG,c(µ,ν). Combining this with the previously obtained reverse inequality,
we get our desired result.
Isometry to Nested Measures
We now specialise our cost functions to obtain an embedding of (PG
p (X),WG,p) into a
certain space of nested measures, which we now introduce. In what follows, we fix p ≥1 and
metrics dk on Xk with respect to which the space PG
p (X) is defined as usual. Moreover,
given a finite collection of metric spaces (D1,dD1),...,(Dm,dDm), Pp (D1) is understood as
a metric space under the classical p-Wasserstein distance induced by dD1, and the product
space D ∶= ∏m
i=1 Di is understood as a metric space under the metric dD given by
dD((x1,...,xm),(˜x1,..., ˜xm))p ∶=
m
∑
i=1
dp
Di(xi, ˜xi).
Definition 6.22 (G-nested distribution). Let N G,p
n
∶= Pp (Xn). For 1 ≤k < n we iteratively
define the spaces N G,p
k
∶= Pp (Xk × ∏i∈Ak N G,p
i
). The space of G-nested distributions N G,p is
then given by
N G,p ∶= ∏
k∈A0
N G,p
k
.
For µ ∈PG
p (X) and a random variable X ∼µ, let ˜Xn ∶= L(Xn ∣Xpan) and iteratively for
1 ≤k < n,
˜Xk ∶= L(Xk,( ˜Xi)i∈Ak ∣Xpak),
where the operation L(⋅∣X∅) is interpreted as L(⋅). Note that each random variable ˜Xk
takes values in N G,p
k
.
Finally, define the G-nested distribution corresponding to µ as
NG(µ) ∶= ( ˜Xk)k∈A0 ∈N G,p.
Theorem 5.4 is a consequence of the following result:
Theorem 6.23. If G is a sorted perfect DAG, then the map NG ∶PG
p (X) →N G,p defined
above is an isometric embedding, i.e.,
WG,p(µ,ν) = dN G,p(NG(µ),NG(ν)) = AWp(µ,ν), ∀µ,ν ∈PG
p (X).
Proof. Fix µ,ν ∈PG
p (X).
As WG,p(µ,ν)p = V G,c(µ,ν) for the Borel and G-separable
cost function given by c(x,y) ∶= ∑n
k=1 dk(xk,yk)p, we may apply Proposition 5.3 to see
WG,p(µ,ν)p = DPPG,c(µ,ν).
We define NG
n (µ,xpan) ∶= µ
xpan
n
∈Pp (Xn) = N G,p
n
and recursively for n −1 ≥k ≥1,
NG
k (µ,xpak) is defined as the pushforward of the measure µ
xpak
k
under the map ϕk,xpak ∶Xk →
Xk × ∏i∈Ak N G,p
i
given by
xk ↦(xk,(NG
i (µ,xpai))i∈Ak),
which is well defined since for all i ∈Ak, i > k and pai ⊆pak ∪{k} as G is perfect. Note that
NG
k (µ,xpak) ∈N G,p
k
for all 1 ≤k ≤n. We may define NG
k (ν,ypak) similarly.
Using the notation of Proposition 5.3, one easily observes by induction that
V G,c
k
(xpak,ypak) = Wp(NG
k (µ,xpak),NG
k (ν,ypak))p, ∀k = 1,...,n.
45


One also observes that, in the notation of Definition 6.22,
˜Xk = NG
k (µ,Xpak) µ-a.s.,
thus NG(µ) = ( ˜Xk)k∈A0 = (NG
k (µ))k∈A0, as any k ∈A0 has no parents.
By symmetry,
NG(ν) = (NG
k (ν))k∈A0.
Hence,
DPPG,c(µ,ν) = ∑
k∈A0
V G,c
k
= ∑
k∈A0
Wp(NG
k (µ),NG
k (ν))p
= dN G,p(NG(µ),NG(ν))p.
We have thus shown that NG is an isometry. We now proceed to show WG,p(µ,ν) =
AWp(µ,ν) via induction on the number of nodes in G.
If G has a single node, then clearly WG,p(µ,ν) = Wp(µ,ν) = AWp(µ,ν).
Suppose we have proved that W ˜
G,p coincides with AWp on spaces of ˜G-compatible mea-
sures for any sorted perfect DAG ˜G with at most n−1 vertices. Let G = (V,E) be (as before)
a sorted DAG with n vertices.
If m ∶= ∣A0∣> 1, G may be written (up to a relabelling) as G = G1 ⊕G2 for two sorted
DAGs G1 = (V1,E1), G2 = (V2,E2), where the Vi partition V and the Ei = E ∩(Vi × Vi)
partition E. Moreover, we may assume without loss of generality that V1 = {1,...,m} for
some 1 ≤m < n via a relabelling. Then µ ∈PG (X) can be written as the product measure
µ(dx) = µV1(dxV1) ⊗µV2(dxV2),
with µVi ∈PGi (XVi). Applying the first part of this proof to G and the Gi, which are perfect,
together with the induction hypothesis, we see that
WG,p(µ,ν)p = dN G,p(NG(µ),NG(ν))p =
2
∑
i=1
dN Gi,p(NGi(µVi),NGi(νVi))p
=
2
∑
i=1
AWp(µVi,νVi)p = AWp(µ,ν)p,
where the last equality follows via Lemma A.4.
If ∣A0∣= 1, then we have A0 = {1}. Let ˜G be the perfect graph obtained by removing the
vertex 1 from G, along with any edges emitting from it. We write µx1 ∶= ⊗n
k=2 µ
xpak
k
,νy1 ∶=
⊗n
k=2 ν
ypak
k
∈P ˜
G (X2∶n). Using the DPP structure in this case, we see that
WG,p(µ,ν)p =
inf
π∈Π(µ1,ν1)∫d1(x1,y1)p + W ˜
G,p(µx1,νy1)p dπ(x1,y1)
=
inf
π∈Π(µ1,ν1)∫d1(x1,y1)p + AWp(µx1,νy1)p dπ(x1,y1) = AWp(µ,ν)p,
where the second equality follows by the induction hypothesis and the third by the DPP struc-
ture of the adapted Wasserstein distance (which can be seen as a special case of Proposition
5.3).
Example 6.24. We illustrate the (at times opaque) definitions above via a few examples.
For different graphs G = (V,E), we explicitly write out the form of the G-nested distribution
corresponding to some general µ ∈PG (X) with the aid of a random variable X ∼µ.
• If V = {1,2,3}, E = {(i,j) ∈V × V ∣i < j}, then NG(µ) is the usual nested distribution
Pflug (2009)
NG(µ) = L(X1,L(X2,L(X3 ∣X1,X2)∣X1)).
46


• If V = {1,2,3}, E = {(1,2),(2,3)}, then
NG(µ) = L(X1,L(X2,L(X3 ∣X2)∣X1)).
However, as X3 ⊥⊥
X2 X1, L(X3 ∣X1,X2) = L(X3 ∣X2), and we could have simply defined
NG(µ) as in the item above, since they are equal.
• If V = {1,2,3,4,5}, E = {(1,2),(1,3),(3,4)}, then
NG(µ) = (L(X1,L(X2 ∣X1),L(X3,L(X4 ∣X3)∣X1)),L(X5)).
6.9
Proof of Statements in Section 3.2
We first prove Theorem 3.5 on Lipschitz continuity for stochastic team problems.
Proof of Theorem 3.5. Fix π ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν) and let (X,Y ) ∼π.
Let ε > 0. Then there exist measurable functions Hk ∶Xk × Xpak →R such that α = H(Y )
is an ε-optimiser for v(ν), i.e.,
v(ν) ≤∫Q(y,H(y))dν(y) ≤v(ν) + ε.
By Lemma 6.25 below applied with A = {k} ∪pak, using the fact that G is transi-
tively closed and hence paA ⊆A and Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) (see Theorem 4.21), we know
(Yk,Ypak)
⊥⊥
Xk,Xpak
X. Thus, one may define the measurable functions ˜Hk ∶Xk × Xpak →R via
˜Hk(xk,xpak) ∶= ∫Hk(yk,ypak)dπxk,xpak (yk,ypak) = ∫Hk(yk,ypak)dπx(yk,ypak),
and thus we can write coordinate-wise that ˜H(x) = ∫H(y)dπx(y) ∈A.
Then, by convexity properties of Q and Jensen’s inequality,
∫Q(x, ˜H(x))dµ(x) = ∫Q(x,∫H(y)dπx(y)) dµ(x)
≤∬Q(x,H(y)) dπx(y)dµ(x) = ∫Q(x,H(y)) dπ(x,y).
Hence, using the Lipschitz property of Q,
v(µ) −v(ν) −ε ≤∫Q(x,H(y)) −Q(y,H(y)) dπ(x,y) ≤L∫dX (x,y)dπ(x,y).
We can obtain a similar relation by switching the roles of µ and ν. As π and ε were fixed
arbitrarily, the result then follows.
Lemma 6.25. Let G be a transitively closed DAG, µ ∈PG (X),ν ∈PG (Y), π ∈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Then, if (X,Y ) ∼π, we have that YA
⊥⊥
XA,XpaA
X, for all A ⊆V .
Proof. Let T ∶ˆ
X →ˆY be a G-biadapted map such that π = projX×Y #ˆπ, where ˆπ ∶= (Id,T)#ˆµ.
Then if (X,U,Y,V ) ∼ˆπ, (X,Y ) ∼π. Moreover, for all i ∈V , Yi = Ti(Xi,Ui,Xpai,Upai), and
thus YA = TA(XA,XpaA,UA,UpaA), where we make a slight abuse of notation and add in
inputs that might not be used. As U is independent of X, this implies our conclusion.
Finally, we end with the following simple lemma used in the proof of Corollary 3.7. We
work under the assumptions and notation of Proposition 3.6 and Corollary 3.7, presented in
Section 3.2.
47


Lemma 6.26. Let G = (V,E) and G′ = (V,E′) be DAGs such that E ⊆E′. Then PG,δ (X) ⊆
PG′,δ (X) and ψµ,G = ψµ,G′ for all µ ∈PG,δ (X).
Proof. We denote by paG
j the parents of node j in G and paG′
j
the parents of node j in G′.
As E ⊆E′, clearly paG
j ⊆paG′
j , and paG′
j
cannot contain a descendant of j in G, as otherwise
G′ would be cyclic.
Let µ ∈PG,δ (X). Then, as µ is G-compatible, by the remark above Xj
⊥⊥
XpaG
j
XpaG′
j
holds
under µ. Consequently, µ(xj = 1∣xpaG′
j ) = µ(xj = 1∣xpaG
j ) ∈[δ,1 −δ], and so µ ∈PG′,δ (X).
To show ψµ,G = ψµ,G′, it is enough to note that paG′
j
satisfies the back-door adjustment
criterion (Pearl, 2009a, Definition 3.3.1) for (Xj,Xk) in G and apply (Pearl, 2009a, Theorem
3.3.2). We offer a direct proof for completeness.
Let A ∶= paG′
j ∖paG
j . Then:
∫XpaG′
j
∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣xj = 1,xpaG′
j )µ(dxpaG′
j ) =
= ∫XpaG
j
∫XA ∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣xj = 1,xpaG
j ,xA)µ(dxA ∣xpaG
j )µ(dxpaG
j )
= ∫XpaG
j
∫XA ∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣xj = 1,xpaG
j ,xA)µ(dxA ∣xj = 1,xpaG
j )µ(dxpaG
j )
= ∫XpaG
j
∫Xk
xk µ(dxk ∣xj = 1,xpaG
j )µ(dxpaG
j ),
where the second equality follows since XA
⊥⊥
XpaG
j
Xj under µ (as above). We can obtain a
symmetric result for xj = 0, and thus we see that the average treatment effects under G and
G′ agree.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Yifan Jiang, Fang Rui Lim, Ivan Guo, Samuel N. Cohen,
Stephan Eckstein, Mathias Beiglb¨ock, Gudmund Pammer, Stefan Schrott, Daniel Lacker,
and Serdar Y¨uksel for interesting conversations regarding this work and related topics. Vlad
Tuchilus,’ research is supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Mathematics
of Random Systems: Analysis, Modelling and Simulation (EPSRC Grant EP/S023925/1).
References
Beatrice Acciaio, Daniel Krˇsek, and Gudmund Pammer. Multicausal transport: barycenters
and dynamic matching. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 16(3):1104–1138, 2025.
Martial Agueh and Guillaume Carlier. Barycenters in the Wasserstein space. SIAM Journal
on Mathematical Analysis, 43(2):904–924, 2011.
D. J. Aldous. Weak convergence and general theory of processes. Unpublished monograph;
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, 1981.
M. Altman. Bilinear programming. Bull. de l’Acad´emie Pol. des Sci., 16(9):741, 1968.
48


Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savar´e. Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in
the space of probability measures. Springer, 2005.
Julio Backhoff, Mathias Beiglb¨ock, Yiqing Lin, and Anastasiia Zalashko. Causal transport
in discrete time and applications. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 27(4):2528–2562, 2017.
Julio Backhoff-Veraguas, Daniel Bartl, Mathias Beiglb¨ock, and Manu Eder. Adapted Wasser-
stein distances and stability in mathematical finance. Finance and Stochastics, 24(3):601–
632, 2020a.
Julio Backhoff-Veraguas, Daniel Bartl, Mathias Beiglb¨ock, and Manu Eder.
All adapted
topologies are equal. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 178(3-4):1125–1172, 2020b.
Julio Backhoff-Veraguas, Mathias Beiglb¨ock, Manu Eder, and Alois Pichler. Fundamental
properties of process distances. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 130(9):5575–
5591, 2020c.
Daniel Bartl and Johannes Wiesel. Sensitivity of multiperiod optimization problems with
respect to the adapted Wasserstein distance. SIAM J. Financial Math., 14(2):704–720,
2023.
Daniel Bartl, Samuel Drapeau, Jan Ob l´oj, and Johannes Wiesel.
Sensitivity analysis of
Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization problems. Proceedings of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 477(2256), 2021.
Daniel Bartl, Mathias Beiglb¨ock, and Gudmund Pammer. The Wasserstein space of stochastic
processes. Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 28(1):393–454, 2024.
Mathias Beiglb¨ock and Daniel Lacker. Denseness of adapted processes among causal cou-
plings. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1805.03185, 2018.
Mathias Beiglb¨ock, Gudmund Pammer, and Stefan Schrott. Denseness of biadapted Monge
mappings. Ann. inst. Henri Poincare (B) Probab. Stat., 61(1):329–349, 2025. Corrected
version available on arXiv:2210.15554v3.
Dimitri P. Bertsekas and Steven E. Shreve. Stochastic optimal control: the discrete time case,
volume 139 of Mathematics in science and engineering. Academic Press, New York, 1978.
Jose Blanchet and Karthyek Murthy. Quantifying distributional model risk via optimal trans-
port. Mathematics of Operations Research, 44(2):565–600, 2019.
Stephan Bongers, Patrick Forr´e, Jonas Peters, and Joris M. Mooij. Foundations of structural
causal models with cycles and latent variables. The Annals of Statistics, 49(5):2885–2915,
2021.
Yann Brenier. Polar factorization and monotone rearrangement of vector-valued functions.
Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 44(4):375–417, 1991.
Anh Tuan Bui, Trung Le, Quan Hung Tran, He Zhao, and Dinh Phung. A unified Wasserstein
distributional robustness framework for adversarial training. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022.
Eranda C¸ela.
The Quadratic Assignment Problem: Theory and Algorithms, volume 1 of
Combinatorial Optimization. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 1998.
Patrick Cheridito and Stephan Eckstein. Optimal transport and Wasserstein distances for
causal models. Bernoulli, 31(2):1351–1376, 2025.
49


Hana Chockler and Joseph Y Halpern. Responsibility and blame: A structural-model ap-
proach. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 22:93–115, 2004.
Ante ´Custi´c, Vladyslav Sokol, Abraham P. Punnen, and Binay Bhattacharya. The bilinear
assignment problem: complexity and polynomially solvable special cases. Mathematical
Programming, 166(1):185–205, 2017.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013.
Stephan Eckstein and Gudmund Pammer.
Computational methods for adapted optimal
transport. The Annals of Applied Probability, 34(1A):675–713, 2024.
Manu Eder. Compactness in adapted weak topologies. arXiv preprint, arXiv:1905.00856,
2019.
Yorgos Felekis, Fabio Massimo Zennaro, Nicola Branchini, and Theodoros Damoulas. Causal
optimal transport of abstractions. In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal Learn-
ing and Reasoning, volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 462–
498, 2024.
Sven Fuhrmann, Michael Kupper, and Max Nendel. Wasserstein perturbations of Markovian
transition semigroups. Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincare (B) Probabilites et statistiques,
59(2):904–932, 2023.
Rui Gao.
Finite-sample guarantees for Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization:
breaking the curse of dimensionality. Operations Research, 71(6):2291–2306, 2023.
Sander Greenland, Judea Pearl, and James M Robins. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic
research. Epidemiology, 10(1):37–48, 1999.
Joseph Y Halpern.
Cause, responsibility and blame: a structural-model approach.
Law,
probability and risk, 14(2):91–118, 2015.
Joseph Y Halpern and Judea Pearl. Causes and explanations: A structural-model approach.
part i: Causes. The British journal for the philosophy of science, 56(4):843–887, 2005.
Martin F. Hellwig. Sequential decisions under uncertainty and the maximum theorem. Jour-
nal of Mathematical Economics, 25(4):443–464, 1996.
Miguel A Hern´an and James M Robins. Causal inference: What If. Boca Raton: Chapman
& Hall/CRC, 2020.
Miguel ´Angel Hern´an, Babette Brumback, and James M Robins. Marginal structural models
to estimate the causal effect of zidovudine on the survival of HIV-positive men. Epidemi-
ology, 11(5):561–570, 2000.
Yifan Jiang and Jan Ob l´oj. Sensitivity of causal distributionally robust optimization. arXiv
preprint, arXiv:2408.17109, 2024.
Olav Kallenberg.
Foundations of Modern Probability, volume 99.
Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2021.
L. V. Kantorovich. On the translocation of masses. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, 37(7–8):
199–201, 1942.
50


Leonid V. Kantorovich and Gennady Sh. Rubinstein.
On a space of completely additive
functions. Vestnik Leningrad University, 13(7):52–59, 1958. In Russian.
Alexander S. Kechris. Classical Descriptive Set Theory, volume 156 of Graduate Texts in
Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
Hans G Kellerer. Duality theorems for marginal problems. Zeitschrift f¨ur Wahrscheinlichkeit-
stheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 67(4):399–432, 1984.
R´emi Lassalle. Causal transport plans and their Monge–Kantorovich problems. Stochastic
Analysis and Applications, 36(3):452–484, 2018.
Steffen L. Lauritzen. Graphical Models. Oxford Statistical Science Series. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2nd edition, 2026.
Christian L´eonard. A survey of the Schr¨odinger problem and some of its connections with
optimal transport. Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems - Series A, 34(4):1533–
1574, 2014.
Facundo M´emoli. Gromov–Wasserstein distances and the metric approach to object matching.
Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 11(4):417–487, 2011.
Peyman Mohajerin Esfahani and Daniel Kuhn. Data-driven distributionally robust optimiza-
tion using the Wasserstein metric: Performance guarantees and tractable reformulations.
Mathematical Programming, 171(1):115–166, 2018.
G Monge. M´emoire sur la th´eorie des d´eblais et des remblais. Imprimerie royale, 1781.
Stephen L Morgan and Christopher Winship. Counterfactuals and causal inference: Methods
and principles for social research. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2007.
Max Nendel and Alessandro Sgarabottolo. A parametric approach to the estimation of convex
risk functionals based on Wasserstein distance. Appl. Math. Optim., 93:8, 2026.
Gudmund Pammer.
A note on the adapted weak topology in discrete time.
Electronic
Communications in Probability, 29:1–13, 2024.
Judea Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference.
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA, 1988.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009a.
Judea Pearl. Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Statistics Surveys, 3:96–146, 2009b.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Elements of causal inference: foun-
dations and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Gabriel Peyr´e and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport with applications to data
sciences. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
Georg Ch. Pflug.
Version-independence and nested distributions in multistage stochastic
optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 20(3):1406–1420, 2009.
Georg Ch. Pflug and Alois Pichler. A distance for multistage stochastic optimization models.
SIAM Journal on Optimization, 22(1):1–23, 2012.
Georg Ch. Pflug and Alois Pichler. Multistage Stochastic Optimization. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2014.
51


Aldo Pratelli. On the equality between Monge’s infimum and Kantorovich’s minimum in
optimal mass transportation.
Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincar´e (B) Probabilit´es et
Statistiques, 43(1):1–13, 2007.
Hamed Rahimian and Sanjay Mehrotra. Frameworks and results in distributionally robust
optimization. Open Journal of Mathematical Optimization, 3:1–85, 2022.
D. Ramachandran and Ludger R¨uschendorf. A general duality theorem for marginal problems.
Probability Theory and Related Fields, 101(3):311–319, 1995.
Ievgen Redko, Titouan Vayer, R´emi Flamary, and Nicolas Courty. CO-Optimal Transport. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2020.
Paul K. Rubenstein, Sebastian Weichwald, Stephan Bongers, Joris M. Mooij, Dominik Janz-
ing, Moritz Grosse-Wentrup, and Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Causal consistency of structural
equation models. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intel-
ligence (UAI 2017), pages 808–817. AUAI Press, 2017.
Filippo Santambrogio. Optimal Transport for Applied Mathematicians: Calculus of Varia-
tions, PDEs, and Modeling, volume 87 of Progress in Nonlinear Differential Equations and
Their Applications. Birkh¨auser Cham, 2015.
Milan Studen´y. Probabilistic conditional independence structures. Springer, London, 2005.
C´edric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation, volume 58 of Graduate studies in mathe-
matics. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2003.
C´edric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338 of Grundlehren der mathematis-
chen Wissenschaften. Springer, Berlin, 2009.
Gabriele Visentin and Patrick Cheridito. Robust optimization in causal models and g-causal
normalizing flows. arXiv preprint, arXiv:2510.15458, 2025.
Serdar Y¨uksel and Tamer Ba¸sar. Stochastic Teams, Games, and Control under Information
Constraints. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2024.
Zhengxin Zhang, Ziv Goldfeld, Youssef Mroueh, and Bharath K Sriperumbudur. Gromov–
Wasserstein distances: Entropic regularization, duality and sample complexity. The Annals
of Statistics, 52(4):1616–1645, 2024.
A
Technical Results
In this appendix we prove some measure-theoretic results used in Section 6.
Proposition A.1. Let G = (V,E) be a sorted DAG. Suppose A ⊆V is such that pai ⊆A for
all i ∈A. Let µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), π ∈Πc
G (µ,ν). Let µA ∶= projXA#µ, νA ∶= projYA#ν,
πA ∶= projXA×YA#π.
Then, if we define the graph GA ∶= (A,E∩(A×A)), obtained by deleting from G all the ver-
tices that do not belong in A along with any incident edges, we have that πA ∈Πc
GA (µA,νA).
52


Proof. We may assume without loss of generality via a relabelling that A = {1,...,m}⊆
{1,...,n} = V for some n ≥m ≥1. As pai ⊆A for all i ∈A, we may ensure that G remains
sorted under this relabelling. Once this has been done, the statement is a simple consequence
of (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Theorem 3.4(iv)), as outlined below.
By (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025, Theorem 3.4(iv)), π may be disintegrated as
π(dx,dy) =
n
⊗
i=1
π(dxi,dyi ∣xpai,ypai)
= (
m
⊗
i=1
π(dxi,dyi ∣xpai,ypai)) ⊗(
n
⊗
i=m+1
π(dxi,dyi ∣xpai,ypai)),
where π(dxi ∣xpai,ypai) = µ(dxi ∣xpai) π-a.s. for all 1 ≤i ≤n.
Clearly now πA(dxA,dyA) = ⊗m
i=1 π(dxi,dyi ∣xpai,ypai) with the kernels satisfying π(dxi ∣
xpai,ypai) = µ(dxi ∣xpai) = µA(dxi ∣xpai) π-a.s. so also πA-a.s. for all 1 ≤i ≤m. Thus,
πA ∈Πc
GA (µA,νA).
In what follows, we denote the DAG with 2 vertices connected by a directed arrow by
G2 ∶= ({1,2},{(1,2)}).
Lemma A.2. Suppose µ ∈PG2 (X1∶2), ν ∈PG2 (Y1∶2), η ∈PG2 (Z1∶2), π ∈Πc
G2 (µ,ν), ˜π ∈
Πc
G2 (ν,η). Let π1 ∶= projX1×Y1#π, and ˜π1 ∶= projY1×Z1#˜π. Then
proj(X1×Y1×Z1)# (π ˙⊗˜π) = π1 ˙⊗˜π1.
Proof. Let (X,Y,Z) ∼π ˙⊗˜π. Clearly, (X1,Y1) ∼π1, (Y1,Z1) ∼˜π1. It suffices to show that
X1 ⊥⊥
Y1 Z1, since this will imply that (X1,Y1,Z1) ∼π1 ˙⊗˜π1, which is what we needed to show.
As ˜π ∈Πc
G2 (ν,η), we know Z1 ⊥⊥
Y1 Y . By properties of ˙⊗, X ⊥⊥
Y Z, so particularly also
Z1 ⊥⊥
Y X1.
Combining these two relations via the chain rule (Kallenberg, 2021, Theorem
8.12), we get Z1 ⊥⊥
Y1 (X1,Y ), which implies Z1 ⊥⊥
Y1 X1.
Proposition A.3. Let G = (V,E) be a sorted DAG. Suppose A ⊆V is such that pai ⊆A
for all i ∈A. Let µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), η ∈PG (Z), π ∈Πc
G (µ,ν), ˜π ∈Πc
G (ν,η) and
πA ∶= projXA×YA#π, ˜πA ∶= projYA×ZA#˜π. Then
proj(XA×YA×ZA)# (π ˙⊗˜π) = πA ˙⊗˜πA.
Proof. This is a simple consequence of Lemma A.2. Indeed, we may consider the product
space XA as a single Polish space ˜
X1, the product space XV ∖A as a single Polish space ˜
X2,
with similar definitions for ˜Yi, ˜Zi. Then, as pai ⊆A for all i ∈A, µ ∈PG2 ( ˜
X1∶2) when viewed
as a measure on ˜
X1 × ˜
X2, π ∈Πc
G2 (µ,ν) when viewed as a measure on ( ˜
X1 × ˜
X2) × ( ˜Y1 × ˜Y2),
with similar relations holding for ν,η, ˜π. We may now apply Lemma A.2 to get our result.
Lemma A.4. Let 1 ≤m < n. Suppose µ,ν ∈Pp (X1∶n) are such that they can be written as
product measures µ = µ1 ⊗µ2, ν = ν1 ⊗ν2 for some µ1,ν1 ∈Pp (X1∶m), µ2,ν2 ∈Pp (Xm+1∶n).
Then,
AWp(µ,ν)p = AWp(µ1,ν1)p + AWp(µ2,ν2)p.
Proof. Let X ∼µ, Y ∼ν. The adapted Wasserstein distance between µ and ν is the distance
between their associated nested distributions Pflug (2009).
Let ˜Xn ∶= L(Xn ∣X1∶n−1) and for n > k ≥1,
˜Xk ∶= L(Xk, ˜Xk+1 ∣X1∶k−1).
Then ˜X1
is the nested distribution of µ.
As X1∶m ⊥⊥Xm+1∶n, we have for k ≥m + 1 that ˜Xk =
53


L(Xk, ˜Xk+1 ∣Xm+1∶k−1). In particular, ˜Xm+1 = L(Xm+1, ˜Xm+2) is a constant random vari-
able, equal to the corresponding nested distribution of µ2. Hence, now ˜X1 is equal to the
nested distribution corresponding to the law of the vector below, viewed as an m-step stochas-
tic process
ˆX ∶= (X1,...,Xm−1,(Xm, ˜Xm+1)).
Symmetrical statements hold for ν. Thus
AWp(µ,ν)p = d( ˜X1, ˜Y1)p = AWp (L( ˆX),L( ˆY ))
p
= AWp (L(X1∶m),L(Y1∶m))p + d( ˜Xm+1, ˜Ym+1)p
= AWp(µ1,ν1)p + AWp(µ2,ν2)p,
as the constant random variables ˜Xm, ˜Ym simply add a constant term to the cost function.
B
Weak Closedness of G-compatible Measures
This section records some complementary results for the proof of Proposition 4.13.
Example B.1. For completeness, we repeat the example of (Cheridito and Eckstein, 2025,
Proposition 3.3(iv)) for Gchain:
PGchain (R3) ∋1
2 (δ(1, 1
k ,1) + δ(−1, −1
k ,−1))
k→∞
ÔÔ⇒1
2 (δ(1,0,1) + δ(−1,0,−1)) ∉PGchain (R3).
This can easily be adapted to an example for Gsplit by changing the order of the coordi-
nates:
PGsplit (R3) ∋1
2 (δ( 1
k ,1,1) + δ( −1
k ,−1,−1))
k→∞
ÔÔ⇒1
2 (δ(0,1,1) + δ(0,−1,−1)) ∉PGsplit (R3).
Both of the examples above can be extended to graphs G which have Gchain as a proper
subgraph and thus lack the transitive closure property, or which have Gsplit as proper sub-
graphs and thus contain a split. This can be done by fixing all other coordinates to be equal
to zero in both the measures in the sequence and in the limit.
Lemma B.2. Suppose G = GA ⊕GB and that both PGA (XA) and PGB (XB) are weakly
closed. Then PG (XA × XB) is weakly closed.
Proof. Clearly, a measure µ ∈PG (XA × XB) if and only if it can be written as µ = µA ⊗µB
with its marginals µA,µB having the property that µA ∈PGA (XA) and µB ∈PGB (XB).
Let then (µ(k)
A ⊗µ(k)
B )
k≥1 be a sequence in PG (XA × XB) converging weakly to some
µ ∈P (XA × XB). As weak convergence implies weak convergence of marginals as well, we
have µ(k)
A
⇒µA and µ(k)
B
⇒µB. Since PGA (XA) is weakly closed, we see µA ∈PGA (XA),
and similarly µB ∈PGB (XB).
Then, for all f ∈Cb (XA), g ∈Cb (XB):
∫f(xA)g(xB)dµ = lim
k→∞∫f(xA)g(xB)dµ(k)
A ⊗µ(k)
B
= lim
k→∞∫f(xA)dµ(k)
A ∫g(xB)dµ(k)
B
= ∫f(xA)dµA ∫g(xB)dµB,
and thus µ = µA ⊗µB, and in particular µ is G-compatible.
Lemma B.3. Suppose PG (X1∶n) is weakly closed. Then PG+ (X1∶n+1) is weakly closed.
Proof. This follows trivially by the fact that weak convergence implies weak convergence of
marginals, and noting that a measure µ ∈P (X1∶n+1) is G+-compatible if and only if its X1∶n
marginal µ1∶n is G-compatible.
54


C
DAGs Without Transitive Closure Property
We provide here some technical results used in the proof of Proposition 4.28.
Lemma C.1. For a DAG G, and µ ∈PG (X), ν ∈PG (Y), we have that Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊆̃
Πbc
G (µ,ν).
Proof. Note that since G is acyclic, the set of parents of node i in G is ani, the set of ancestors
of node i in G.
Let π ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν), and (X,Y ) ∼π. By repeated applications of Lemma C.2 one can con-
struct Unif[0,1] random variables U1,...,Un,V1,...,Vn such that (X,Y ),U1,...,Un are in-
dependent, (X,Y ),V1,...,Vn are independent, and σ(Ui,Vi) = σ(Ui,Upai,Vpai,Xpai,Ypai) =
σ(Vi,Upai,Vpai,Xpai,Ypai) for all i ∈V .
By induction, the last statement implies that
σ(Ui,Vi) = σ(Ui,Uani,Xani,Yani) = σ(Vi,Vani,Xani,Yani) for all i ∈V .
By construction, ˆX ∶= (X,U) ∼ˆµ, ˆY ∶= (Y,V ) ∼ˆν. Thus, it suffices to show that L( ˆX, ˆY ) ∈
Πbc
G (ˆµ, ˆν). We focus on the causal direction. The anticausal one will then follow by symmetry.
We need to show that ˆYi
⊥⊥
ˆ
Xi, ˆ
Xpai, ˆYpai
( ˆX, ˆY1∶i−1), i.e., by expanding out that
(Yi,Vi)
⊥⊥
Xi,Xpai,Ypai,Ui,Upai,Vpai
(X,Y1∶i−1,U,V1∶i−1).
But, by the properties above, σ(Xi,Xpai,Ypai,Ui,Upai,Vpai) = σ(Xi,Xani,Yani,Ui,Uani),
and σ(X,Y1∶i−1,U,V1∶i−1) = σ(X,Y1∶i−1,U). Thus, conditional independence relation above
becomes
(Yi,Vi)
⊥⊥
Xi,Xani,Yani,Ui,Uani
(X,Y1∶i−1,U).
Since Vi is σ(Ui,Uani,Xani,Yani)-measurable, this is equivalent to proving
Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xani,Yani,Ui,Uani
(X,Y1∶i−1,U).
(18)
As π ∈Πbc
G (µ,ν), we know that Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xani,Yani
(X,Y1∶i−1). By construction, we also know
that U ⊥⊥(X,Y ), and thus Yi
⊥⊥
X,Y1∶i−1 U. Combining these using the chain rule of conditional
independence (Kallenberg, 2021, Theorem 8.12), we see that
Yi
⊥⊥
Xi,Xani,Yani
(X,Y1∶i−1,U),
which is a stronger statement than (18).
Lemma C.2. Given random variables Ξ,Υ defined on the same probability space and taking
values in standard Borel spaces, we may define (after possibly enlarging the sample space)
Unif[0,1] random variables U,V such that U is independent of (Ξ,Υ), V is independent of
(Ξ,Υ) but σ(U,V ) = σ(U,Ξ) = σ(V,Ξ).
Proof. By the classification of standard Borel spaces (Bertsekas and Shreve, 1978, Corollary
7.16.1), we may assume without loss of generality that Ξ takes values in the Cantor space
{0,1}N. We write Ξ = (Ξi)i≥1.
Define i.i.d. random variables Ui ∼1
2(δ0 + δ1) independent of (Ξ,Υ). Defining for i ≥1
Vi = Ξi(1−Ui)+(1−Ξi)Ui, we see that the Vi are also i.i.d. random variables with law 1
2(δ0+δ1)
and which are independent of (Ξ,Υ). Moreover, it is easy to see that σ((Ui)i≥1,(Vi)i≥1) =
σ((Ui)i≥1,Ξ) = σ((Vi)i≥1,Ξ).
55


Finally, let U = ∑∞
i=1 Ui2−i, V = ∑∞
i=1 Vi2−i. Then U,V ∼Unif[0,1], σ(U) = σ((Ui)i≥1),
and σ(V ) = σ((Vi)i≥1). The conclusion then follows from the properties of the Ui,Vi given
above.
The example below shows that generally Πbc
G (µ,ν) ⊈̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν), justifying the need to
relax̂ Πbc
G (µ,ν) further to the full generality of̃ Πbc
G (µ,ν) for Proposition 4.28.
Example C.3. Consider Gchain = ({1,2,3},{(1,2),(2,3)}), and X = R3. Let µ ∶= ( 1
2δ0 +
1
2δ1) ⊗δ0 ⊗( 1
2δ0 + 1
2δ1) ∈PGchain (X). Clearly, Gchain = ({1,2,3},{(1,2),(2,3),(1,3)}).
Let X ∼µ and Y1 ∼µ1 be independent, Y2 = 0, and Y3 = X31X1=Y1 +(1−X3)1X1≠Y1. Then
π ∶= L((X,Y )) ∈Πbc
Gchain (µ,µ).
Assuming for a contradiction that π ∈̂ Πbc
Gchain (µ,µ), then we can find U1,U2,U3 i.i.d.
Unif[0,1] random variables independent of X, and measurable functions T1 ∶R2 →R, T3 ∶
R4 →R such that Y1 = T1(X1,U1), and Y3 = T3(X3,U3,X2,U2).
Since, by construction
(X3,U3,X2,U2) ⊥⊥(X1,U1), we see that in this case (X3,Y3) ⊥⊥(X1,Y1). But this is clearly
not true under π. Thus, π ∉̂ Πbc
Gchain (µ,µ).
56
