Ordered Diffusion Kernels
August 19, 2026
Jack H. Soulsby1*, Andreas C.S. Jørgensen1,2, Atiyo Ghosh1, Vahid Shahrezaei1
1 Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, South Kensington, London SW7 2BX, UK
2 Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l’Environnement, CEA CNRS UVSQ, Orme des Merisiers,
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
∗Correspondence to be addressed to jack.soulsby18@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
We introduce Ordered Diffusion Kernels (ODKs), a novel class of local kernels that can approximate
the infinitesimal generator of an arbitrary Itˆo Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE). ODKs are designed
to be applied to data sampled from dynamical systems where little dynamical information is available
a priori. The Laplacian of classical diffusion kernels approximates the Laplace–Beltrami operator on
the underlying manifold; adjusting the normalisation introduces an advection term that depends on the
sampling density; recently, TMDmap generalised this normalisation to target an arbitrary measure, but
at the cost of coupling advection to diffusion. More general local kernels can learn arbitrary second-order
elliptic operators but are formulated in terms of known velocity fields — making the first step of any
analysis a potentially ill-posed inference problem.
To formulate ODK, we first relax the problem of
potential estimation to the more tractable task of inferring an ordering of the data, which we represent
through an ordering function. We prove ODK’s Laplacian converges to the infinitesimal generator of
a gradient-flow SDE with state-dependent isotropic diffusion, without coupling advection and diffusion.
We provide various extensions of ODK to: arbitrary drifts via local ordering functions; anisotropic
diffusions via a Strang splitting scheme; multiple ordering functions; and self-tuning bandwidths. In
addition, we introduce two loss functions which exploit the structure of ODKs to solve a non-parametric
inference problem.
We validate this framework on synthetic data from deterministic and stochastic
systems, demonstrating accurate recovery of operators, velocity fields, extrinsic curvature, and spatially
dependent drift and diffusion coefficients.
Keywords: Local Kernels, Self-tuning Kernels, Non-Parametric Modelling, Infinitesimal Generator,
Markov Matrix, Stochastic Differential Equations, Ordered Topological Spaces.
1
Introduction
Over the last 20 years, a large body of research has been focused on applying kernels to complex, high-
dimensional data to extract geometric and dynamical features. This endeavour has been successful, leading
to the development of many techniques now standard to a data scientist’s tool chest, tackling problems such
as dimensionality reduction [76, 21, 4, 87], dimensionality estimation [44, 37, 46, 32, 1, 26], density estimation
[72, 79, 10, 12], and clustering [80, 64, 25, 75, 22, 92, 69], among others.
Much mathematical machinery, such as the tools of calculus, require the algebraic structure of a vector
(or linear) space, in order to be constructed; however, many geometries of interest cannot be represented
as linear spaces, so the theory of manifolds was developed as a generalisation of linear spaces to those
that are only locally linear and of homogeneous dimension.
The relaxation of global linearity to local
linearity allows the tools of linear spaces to be brought over to the more complex class of manifolds, where
they become the union of their local applications — making sure this union is well-defined is the basis of
differential geometry, and is encoded in the manifold’s atlas (set of charts). The foundational assumption
underlying most kernel methods is that the numerical data we observe clusters on or around an unobserved
1
arXiv:2608.18019v1  [math.NA]  18 Aug 2026


d-dimensional submanifold M ⊂Rn with d ≪n and n ≫1 being the dimension of the data — this is often
called the Manifold Hypothesis. Kernels leverage the manifold structure of data analogously to how manifolds
themselves are defined. Although the data we are provided is high-dimensional and globally complex, we can
use fast-decaying kernels to define affinities between pairs of points which will encode some aspect of the local
neighbourhood for every data point. These local affinities are easily interpretable and vary smoothly on the
underlying manifold. The global geometric complexity of the data is then encoded through the aggregation
of these locally simple descriptions — in much the same way that a manifold is built by smoothly glueing
together locally linear patches. The result is a smooth and interpretable representation of the data that
respects its intrinsic geometry. The central question this raises is whether such a representation, constructed
entirely from local relations, faithfully captures the global structure of the data: in short, is the union of our
intuitions intuitive?
The pursuit of formalising this question — and in particular, understanding the theoretical foundations
of the Laplacian Eigenmaps algorithm [4] — led researchers to establish that the graph Laplacian of an
appropriately normalised symmetric kernel asymptotically approaches the Laplace-Beltrami operator on
the underlying manifold (with metric inherited from ambient space) [6]. This first convergence result was
pointwise, but subsequent work extended this to spectral and uniform convergence [6, 5, 36]. Coifman &
Lafon extended these results to arbitrary compactly supported sampling distributions, q(x), and through this
introduced the class of α-normalisations that add a density dependent drift term into the limiting operator,
Lε,αf(x)
ε→0
−−−→2(1 −α)∇(log q(x)) · ∇f(x) + ∆f(x), where it becomes clear the α ∈[0, 1] controls the
magnitude of this additional term. Operators of this form can be viewed as the infinitesimal generators of Itˆo
Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs): first-order terms become drifts (or advections), second-order terms
become diffusions, and the sampling distribution becomes the transient distribution of the process. If we
make such a connection for the α-normalised operators, we find the coupling between the drift and sampling
density is highly restrictive, limiting us to only considering potential systems in steady state, with potential
satisfying U(x) = −log q(x). Alternative normalisations have been considered, for example by Banisch et al.
[2], whose Target Measure Diffusion Maps (TMDmap) kernel is capable of approximating the drift term of
any gradient flow; however, TMDmap is limited to only considering unit diffusions, as otherwise there will
be an inextricable coupling between the drift and diffusion. The most general result of this kind came from
Berry & Sauer [11], who define the very general class of local kernels which satisfy the conditions of being
fast-decaying (local) but need not be symmetric. In their work they show that appropriately constructed
kernels can approximate operators of the form Lf(x) = µ(x) · ∇f(x) + Dij(x)∇i∇jf where µ ∈T M and
D ∈T 2M — which is the general form of a symmetric second-order elliptic operator and is the infinitesimal
generator of an arbitrary Itˆo SDE of the form dxt = µ(xt)dt + σ(xt)dWt where D(x) = 1
2σ(x)σ(x)T .
To apply local kernels as conceptualised in [11], one is required to know the drift vector field µ(x) and
diffusion tensor field D(x) beforehand. In practice, this limits the applicability of local kernels to complex,
novel data where these quantities are not known a priori and are otherwise highly challenging to infer. In
response to these constraints, we introduce Ordered Diffusion Kernels (ODKs) which, in their standard
form, approximate operators of the form Lf(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x) · ∇f(x) + 1
2ρ(x)2∆f(x), where l(x), τ(x), κ(x),
and ρ(x)2 are scalar fields that define the ordering, speed, order scale-regularisation, and diffusive strength,
respectively. In place of a potential, U(x), we introduce what we call an Ordering Function, l(x), which
in theory would capture the same level set structure as U(x), but whose scale is not important. Through
the scale-regularisation term κ(x), we can make ODKs agnostic to the scale of l(x), thus, the quality of an
ordering function is only in the directionality it implies — and importantly, by relaxing the constraints on
l(x) we significantly reduce the difficulty of the initial inference problem. As a result, ODKs allow us to
approximate operators with arbitrary gradient flows, without coupling the drift to the diffusion, and can
be extended to capture arbitrary drifts. Thus, ODKs are a novel class of local kernels that are much more
practically applicable to data generated from an unknown dynamical process.
An existing class of datasets to which this method is particularly well suited is single-cell RNA-sequencing
(scRNA-seq) data [62]. In scRNA-seq, the measured features are the counts of RNA molecules associated
with each gene in a given cell, with each sample corresponding to a single cell that must be destroyed in
order to make the measurement. The destructive nature of this measurement process means that the RNA
expression of the same cell cannot be measured twice, yielding data that is a collection of independent
expression snapshots containing little to no direct dynamical information about gene expression dynamics.
2


This has motivated a large and rapidly growing body of computational methods aimed at recovering the
underlying dynamics from such static observations [73, 85, 55]. The most common approach is to construct
a so-called pseudotime — a hallucinated ordering of cells that is meant to correlate with the underlying
sampling time of the system, and typically is structured as a distance from a collection of root, or progenitor,
cells [89]. Notably, one of the most widely used pseudotime methods, Diffusion PseudoTime [40], already
exploits diffusion maps by aggregating diffusion distances over all time scales [21].
Pseudotime, as it is
conceptualised within the scRNA-seq field, is a clear example of an ordering function, and thus such data
fits naturally within the ODK framework.
A central goal of single-cell genomics is to go beyond static descriptions of cell states and recover the
underlying gene regulatory networks (GRNs) that govern cell fate determination dynamics. Learning a GRN
is fundamentally equivalent to learning the dynamical system and vector field that drives gene expression —
that is, inferring the drift and diffusion terms of the stochastic process underlying the data. This perspective
has motivated a number of recent computational frameworks: Dynamo [70] attempts to reconstructs the
full vector field of gene expression dynamics from metabolic labelling data and uses it to infer regulatory
Jacobians and predict perturbation outcomes, while RegVelo [94] integrates the inference of splicing kinetics
with GRN structure in a joint deep learning model, enabling in silico perturbation predictions across cell
types.
Despite the power of these approaches, neither provides a principled probabilistic framework for
inferring spatially varying diffusion, which reflects cell-to-cell variability in transcriptional noise and is rarely
modelled explicitly in this field. ODKs offer a complementary approach: by using pseudotime as an ordering
function and fitting the speed and diffusion parameters either from an external inference method or directly
via gradient descent, we reduce the inference problem from 1
2mn(n + 3) parameters — corresponding to a
full vector field and a symmetric 2-tensor field — to only 2m parameters corresponding to two scalar fields,
where m is the number of samples, and n the number of ambient dimensions. This dramatic reduction in the
size of the inference problem makes it far more likely to be well-posed and tractable on the characteristically
noisy and high-dimensional count matrices that arise in scRNA-seq experiments. The application of ODKs
to scRNA-seq data is not explored in this paper, but this discussion illustrates the natural fit between the
ODK framework and this existing class of data, motivating the development of ODKs as a principled tool
for recovering the dynamics of complex systems in the absence of dynamical information.
In this paper, we will make clear the assumptions on our data and introduce the idea of an ordering
function as a relaxation of a potential in section 2. Following this, in section 3, we will define ODKs and
explain the notational choices we make to provide practitioners fine control over the first- and second-order
terms of the normalised Laplacian; we will then describe the limiting behaviour of this kernel and prove
that its Laplacian approximates the infinitesimal generator of a gradient-flow SDE with isotropic diffusion.
In section 3.1, we will extend ODK to capture arbitrary drifts through both a local ordering function and
a multiple ordering function formulation; in section 3.2, we will generalise to anisotropic diffusions, which
introduces a coupling between the drift and diffusion which we can remove by composing two different
kernels within a Strang splitting scheme.
In addition, in section 3.2.1, we extend ODK to self-tuning
bandwidths of the form ρ(x)ρ(y).
Finally, in section 4, we will apply ODKs to a variety of numerical
examples on data sampled from dynamical and stochastic systems; of particular importance, in section 4.3,
we will introduce two objectives for gradient-based optimisation schemes, which we use to infer the drift and
diffusion parameters of an unknown SDE with a spatially dependent diffusion.
2
Problem Setup
In this section, we extend the discussion of the introduction and specify the sampling assumptions of the
data we wish to study before providing a more complete discussion of the ordering function and why we
distinguish it from the more usual potential function formulation.
2.1
Sampling of the Data
We consider a dataset D = {xi}m
i=1 ⊂Rn that is composed of m independent samples from a deterministic or
stochastic dynamical system; we assume the distribution over initial states of the system is known and has
bounded support, denoted p0(x) with X0 := supp p0. The sampling procedure is assumed to be as follows:
for a given initial state x0 ∼p0, we evolve a single trajectory of the dynamical system forward up to a random
3


stopping time t ∼r, where we call r(t) the time-sampling distribution and which is compactly supported on
the interval [0, T], where T < ∞is the upper time horizon. For deterministic data, the sampling distribution
satisfies:
q(x) =
Z T
0
r(t)p0(Φ−1
t (x))

dΦ−1
t
dx (x)
 dt =
Z T
0
r(t)p0(Φ−1
t (x)) exp

−
Z t
0
∇· v(Φs(Φ−1
t (x)))ds

dt,
(1)
where Φt(x) is the flow map of the dynamical system dx
dt = v(x) over the time interval [0, t], and satisfies:
Φt(x0) = x0 +
R t
0 v(Φs(x0))ds and Φ0(x0) = x0. For data generated by a stochastic system, the sampling
distribution satisfies:
q(x) =
Z T
0
r(t)
Z
X0
pt(Xt = x|X0 = x0)p0(x0)dx0dt.
(2)
We assume that our data lies on or near a d-dimensional Riemannian submanifold M of Rn, with metric
inherited from the standard Euclidean metric on Rn.1 More precisely, we assume there exists an isometric
embedding ι : M →Rn such that our data clusters around the image ι(M) — since ι is an isomorphism
of Riemannian manifolds, when it is not ambiguous to do so, we abuse notation and let M denote ι(M).
As noted in the introduction, the assumption of the existence of M is often referred to as the Manifold
Hypothesis and is at the core of the theoretical development of kernel-based methods and manifold learning
in general [8, 34]. The justification of this assumption is simple: nature is inherently efficient, and if our data
D ⊂Rn, with n ≫1, has been generated by some physical system, then by Occam’s Razor it is unlikely that
there will be n independent degrees of freedom, and thus it is wise to consider the intrinsic dimensionality of
the system as being much smaller than n, and which we always denote as d. The validation of this statement
might reasonably be found in the success of methods that presume it: in the field of deep learning, methods
such as AutoEncoders operate by first compressing the data with an encoder f : Rn →Rd, with d ≪n,
before undoing this transformation with a decoder g : Rd →Rn, the objective being optimised is then some
variation of ∥g ◦f −id∥. The fact that these bottlenecked architectures have been shown to work across a
wide variety of datasets empirically supports the conclusion that most high-dimensional data will, in reality,
have far fewer degrees of freedom than their expressed dimensionality would indicate [47, 93, 52]. After these
considerations, we are emboldened to assume the ubiquitous existence of an underlying manifold.
2.2
Ordering Functions
As discussed in the introduction, if the velocities generating the underlying data are unknown, and one has
no strong a priori knowledge of the underlying system, inferring them is a highly challenging task whose
complexity scales linearly with the system’s dimensionality. A more tractable task may be the inference
of a potential function, U(x), that governs the deterministic behaviour of the system by favouring lower
energy states; but a potential must simultaneously imply the correct directionality and rate of change of the
system, which requires either a priori knowledge or some additional dynamical constraints, examples of such
additional information include: time marginals that allow you to set up an Optimal Transport problem [74],
velocity estimates [9], or an assumption of stationarity, where the sampling distribution should correspond
to the potential through the Boltzmann distribution [50] — this latter example would also correspond to
using α = 1
2 in the α-normalised Diffusion Maps transition matrix [21]. In summary, inferring a reasonable
potential remains a difficult task in practice and often requires building or tailoring an inference machine to
the specific data at hand.
To navigate this obstacle, we propose relaxing the problem from inferring a potential to inferring — or
simply constructing — an ordering of the data, which is only required to imply the correct directionality of
the system and whose scale is irrelevant. Implying the correct directionality is just about making statements
of the form “given I’m at some x ∈M, which of my neighbours are closer to where I’m ultimately going
than I currently am” (or equivalently, further away from where I came), this can be phrased as binary
relation that tells you whether another point y ∈M is further along in its evolution that my current x. The
study of different notions of ordering a mathematical space is tackled in the field of order theory. The most
1By “near”, we mean that there can be some additional measurement noise that slightly perturbs the observed samples away
from a smooth underlying manifold.
4


familiar generalisation of the canonical ordering on R to more complex spaces is the notion of a Linear Quasi-
Order (LQO)2 of a topological space, X, which is a binary relation, ≤: X × X →{0, 1}, that is reflexive
(∀x ∈X, x ≤x), transitive (∀x, y, z ∈X, x ≤y ∧y ≤z =⇒x ≤z), and linear (∀x, y ∈X, x ≤y ∨y ≤x).
This ordering is continuous if its upper and lower sets are topologically closed, i.e. the order is adapted to
the underlying topology in a natural manner; see [96] or Appendix B.1 for more details. It is true that any
continuous LQO on a topological space can be generated by a continuous function l : X →R in the following
sense:
x ≤l y ⇐⇒l(x) ≤l(y).
(3)
We call such a continuous function an ordering function of the topological space X.
We note that an
ordering function, as we have conceptualised it, has been studied before as a utility function or, in more
modern terminology, a utility representation of Quasi-Ordered Topological Spaces (X, ≤). It was shown by
Debreu [24] that (X, ≤) admits a utility function of the form (3) if and only if ≤is linear and continuous, and
X is second-countable. When we specialise to topological manifolds, M, we can imagine a suitable ordering
function being such that the level sets of l(x) slice the manifold into disjoint connected upper and lower
sets with a certain degree of regularity; we could formulate this concisely as: the level sets of an ordering
function should (almost) form a codimension-one foliation of M.3 We say almost a foliation to allow for
singular leaves which allow, for example, an ordering function to have extremal elements; we refer the reader
to Appendix B.1 for a more in-depth discussion. Hence, when we refer to an ordering function, it is functions
of this sort that one should be imagining, and it is the ordering function that we propose to use in place of
potential functions.
The reason we make the distinction between orderings and potentials is to greatly reduce the difficulty
of the initial inference step, as the complex dynamical constraints that must be satisfied by a potential have
been removed. As an example, if we knew the distribution over initial states of our system, p0(x), we could
construct an ordering function as l(x) = Ex0∼p0[dG(x0, x)] where dG(x, y) denotes the geodesic distance on
some symmetric connected graph G = (V, E) of the data (see Appendix B.3.1 for more details). A good
ordering function needs only to capture the rough flow of the dynamics, and thus we have much greater
freedom when inferring (or constructing) it, and can conduct our analysis much more freely — albeit at a
coarser level. Naturally, one should use whatever dynamical information is available and, where appropriate,
set up a domain-specific inference problem for the ordering function or potential — in the latter case, we
would then set l(x) = −U(x).
In section 3.1, we generalise the notion of an ordering function of the form l(x) to that of a local ordering
function l(x, y), that satisfies l(x, x) = 0 for all x ∈M, and defines an ordering in a local neighbourhood, Ux,
of any x ∈M through: x ≤lx y ⇐⇒l(x, y) ≥0. This generalisation is entirely compatible with the former
conception of an ordering function since any global (linear) ordering function l(x) can be written in the form
of a local ordering function through l(x, y) = l(y) −l(x), with Ux = M for all x ∈M. The implications
of this are twofold: first, if a quasi-order is not linear, it is not always possible to define a single global
ordering function, but it is guaranteed that there exists a local ordering function capable of representing the
order. Furthermore, if we wished to consider a more general notion of ordering on a topological space —
such as d-spaces [38], or streams [54], both of which relax the assumption of transitivity — that is more local
in nature (i.e. we can only compare points that are close to one another), or if we wished to study more
complex order topologies (such as cyclic orders which require the condition of transitivity to be relaxed), then
a single global ordering function is unlikely to be sufficient (or is guaranteed to be insufficient in the case of
cyclic orders) in representing this new complexity. Second, as we will see in the next section, using a global
ordering function restricts us to only approximate the dynamics of gradient-flow SDEs, i.e. infinitesimal
generators of the form L = −∇U · ∇+ 1
2ρ2∆. As we will see in section 3.1, generalising to local ordering
functions allows us to approximate operators with arbitrary drifts.
2Terms vary in the literature, with quasi-orders often referred to as pre-orders, and the property of linearity as totality.
3A p-dimensional foliation of a d-dimensional manifold M is a decomposition of M into a union of disjoint and connected
p-dimensional submanifolds called the leaves of the foliation. The codimension of a foliation is q = d −p.
5


3
Main Results
In Local Kernels ([11]), Berry & Sauer define a prototypical local kernel, with isotropic diffusion, to be:
Kε(x, y) = exp

−∥y −x −εb(x)∥2
2ερ(x)2

,
(4)
where b(x) is a vector field, and ρ(x) a scalar field bounded uniformly away from zero. As they note, it
is essential for convergence as ε →0 that b(x) and ρ(x)2 scale linearly with ε. This is analogous to the
short-timescale approximation of an Itˆo transition P(Xdt = y|X0 = x) where both the drift and diffusion
scale linearly with the time increment dt. Therefore, intuitively: ε is a timescale, b(x) a drift, and 1
2ρ(x)2Id
an isotropic diffusion. With this structure in mind, we define an Ordered Diffusion Kernel (ODK) as:
Definition 3.1 (Ordered Diffusion Kernel). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold embedded in
Rn and with metric inherited from the ambient space, and let l : M →R be a C2(M) ordering function. An
Ordered Diffusion Kernel (ODK) on M with respect to the ordering l, is defined as:
Kε(x, y) := h
∥y −x∥2
ερ(x)2
+ (l(y) −l(x) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2
−(l(y) −l(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2

,
(5)
where h : R≥0 →R≥0 is a smooth function bounded above by an exponential (i.e. ∃C, σ > 0 : h(u) ≤
C exp(−u/σ2)); τ(x) is a C1(M) scalar function; κ(x) is a C1(M) positive scalar function bounded uniformly
away from zero (i.e. ∃cκ such that ∀x ∈M, κ(x) ≥cκ); and ρ(x) is a C2(M) positive scalar function bounded
uniformly away from zero (i.e. ∃cρ > 0 such that ∀x ∈M, ρ(x) ≥cρ).
Denote by (⋆) the expression inside of h(· · · ) in equation (5), to understand the reasoning behind definition
3.1 we will break it down term-by-term: the first term of (⋆) drives the diffusion analogous to a diffusion
maps kernel [21] (or, more precisely, the left-formulation of a Variable Bandwidth Kernel [10]), while the
second term of (⋆) introduces a bias towards higher-order samples analagous to a 1-dimensional local kernel
[11]. The third term of (⋆) acts as a form of dimensionality correction, which is required since the first two
terms together effectively constitute a (d + 1)-dimensional Euclidean metric on the embedded graph of l(x),
and is dimensionally inconsistent with the underlying manifold. More precisely, we note that since l(x) is an
ordering function, the (almost) foliating property implies the existence of a vector field normal to the level
sets of l, denoted ∇l, suppose around some point x, one takes a normal coordinate system (x1, . . . , xd) such
that ∂d is parallel to ∇l with respect to the inherited metric, after setting b(x) = τ(x)∂d in the local kernel
formulation, we find:
∥y −x −εb(x)∥2 =
d−1
X
i=1
x2
i + (xd −ετ(x))2 =
d
X
i=1
x2
i + (xd −ετ(x))2 −x2
d = ∥y −x∥2 + (xd −ετ(x))2 −x2
d (6)
which is the exact form of (⋆) in definition 3.1. So, these three terms together can be seen to be implicitly
extracting the xd coordinate parallel to ∇l, adding a bias along this coordinate, which resembles a (d + 1)-
dimensional norm, and then subtracting the extra, unbiased, squared distance along xd. Thus, we see that
(5), is approximately equivalent to:
Kε(x, y) ≈h
 
1
ερ(x)2
y −x −ετ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x)

2!
(7)
with ε controlling the timescale, 1
2ρ(x)2 the diffusion, and τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x) the drift. To justify the introduction
of the κ(x) term first note that l(y) −l(x) ≈⟨y −x, ∇l(x)⟩= ∥∇l(x)∥xd, so (l(y) −l(x))2 depends on the
scale of l(x), setting κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥in equation (5), allows us to regularise the drift to be agnostic to the
scale of l. We do not fix κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥, since in cases where one’s ordering is thought to contain dynamical
information (such as when l(x) = −U(x) is a negative potential) setting τ(x) = κ(x) ≡1 will give the
desired dynamics. Additionally, if l(x) was equal to a timing function t(x),4 defined as the time to go from
4If our underlying dynamics are deterministic, the timing function can be defined unambiguously; otherwise, if our underlying
dynamics are stochastic, we must decide on a convention, such as the mean first passage time, to define t(x).
6


an initial state to the state x, then setting τ(x) ≡1 and κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥2 ≈∥∇U(x)∥−2 might be most
appropriate, since ∇t(x)·∇U(x) ≡−1 will always be true, and if ∥∇U(x)∥is constant on level sets of U, then
∇t(x) = −
∇U(x)
∥∇U(x)∥2 , and this setup will reconstruct the dynamics exactly. As a result κ(x) should be treated
more like a hyperparameter of the kernel, needing to be set by the user depending on whether ones ordering
function is potential-like, where one should set κ(x) ≡1, time-like, where one should set κ(x) ∝∥∇l(x)∥2,
or is purely an representation of an ordering, in which case one should set κ(x) ∝∥∇l(x)∥. In practice it is
unlikely that you will have an analytic expression for l(x), so one must estimate ∥∇l(x)∥numerically from
the data, which is non-trivial in high dimensions; in Appendix B.2 we overview a method we use to compute
these estimates in practice, and which we have found to be superior to other alternatives when applied to
real data.
To understand the limiting behaviour of ODKs as ε →0, we first define a ε > 0 family of (backward5)
integral operators, {Gε}ε>0, associated to a given ODK. For some bounded f ∈C3(M), we define Gε as:
Gεf(x) := ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε(x, y)f(y)dy.
(8)
For each ε > 0, we can define a normalised integral operator corresponding to Gε through:
Pεf(x) := (Gε1(x))−1Gεf(x),
(9)
where 1(x) = 1, ∀x ∈M. The expansion of these operators in terms of ε is given in the following theorem:
Theorem 3.1 (Expansion of Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Suppose M is a d-dimensional Riemannian man-
ifold embedded in Rn and with the metric inherited from the standard Euclidean metric in ambient space. Let
l ∈C2(M) be an ordering function, and let Kε(x, y) be the corresponding ODK as defined in (5). Then for
any f ∈C3(M) the associated family of backward integral operators {Gε}ε>0 admits the following asymptotic
expansion as ε →0 when applied to f:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2),
(10)
where ωl(x) depends on the manifold and kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and Ωl(x) depends on the manifold, kernel
Kε(x, ·), and the test function f at x. The differential operator L is a second-order elliptic operator of the
form:
Lf(x) = µ(x) · ∇f(x) + D(x)∆f(x)
(11)
where m(x), µ(x) and D(x), satisfy:
m(x) =
Z
TxM
h

∥z∥2
ρ(x)2

dz
(12)
µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x)
(13)
D(x) = 1
2m(x)−1
Z
TxM
z2
1 h

∥z∥2
ρ(x)2

dz =: 1
2σh(x)2ρ(x)2
(14)
where
σh(x)2 =
1
R
TxM h(∥z∥2) d z
Z
TxM
z2
1h(∥z∥2) d z.
(15)
The normalised backward integral operator can thus be expanded in terms of ε as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLf(x) + O(ε3/2).
(16)
Proof. See Appendix A.1.
5Calling an operator the backward or forward operator refers to the Kolmogorov equations [53], but when working with
discrete data it is equivalent to the Markov transition probability matrix acting on the left or the right of a given test function,
respectively.
7


If we use the prototypical ODK, i.e. if we set h(u) = exp(−u/2), then D(x) = 1
2ρ(x)2 since σh(x)2 ≡1 for
the standard Gaussian kernel, thus L would be the infinitesimal generator of the Itˆo SDE dxt = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x)dt+
ρ(x)dwt, which gives a very explicit connection between the parameters of the kernel and the underlying
stochastic dynamics they imply.
Although our choice of normalisation for Pε is the most canonical (when applied to discrete data, this
normalisation is equivalent to row-normalising the transition matrix as we will see in section 3.3), it should
be noted that other normalisations exist and have the same effect of removing the unwanted ωl(x)f(x) term
from the expansion of Gεf(x) (see, for example, [4, 21, 11]). The utility of these normalisations are that
they preclude the need to compute the dimensionality of the manifold, since the normalisation constant
ε−d/2 cancels, allowing us to directly use unnormalised kernels that do not integrate to 1 on the tangent
space, and which otherwise would require us to estimate the volume element over the manifold, increasing
the computational complexity and introducing new sources of error.
We also note that we are using a different convention from what is standard in the literature by defining
Lf = 1
m[˜µ · ∇f + ˜D∆f], where ˜µ and ˜D are the first- and second-order moments of the unnormalised kernel
(as given equation 1 of [11]). We are motivated to do this because the symmetry enforced by wrapping the
expression (⋆) in h(·) allows for highly interpretable forms for µ(x) and D(x), and we do not wish to obscure
this notationally by using the more general form utilised in local kernels [11].
We denote by G∗
ε the formal adjoint of the (backward) integral operator Gε defined in equation (8),
i.e. for any f, g ∈L2(M) ∩C3(M), G∗
ε satisfies ⟨f, Gεg⟩L2 = ⟨G∗
εf, g⟩L2, we call this operator the forward
integral operator and note that it necessarily takes the following form:
G∗
εf(x) := ε−d/2
Z
N
Kε(y, x)f(y)dy.
(17)
Furthermore, due to our choice of convention for the differential operator L, we are afforded the following
far more intuitive form for the normalised adjoint operator:
P ∗
ε f(x) := G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f)(x).
(18)
In a discrete setting, this normalisation is equivalent to taking the matrix transpose of the Markov transition
probability matrix given in (9) — such a convenient formulation is afforded to us through our choice of
normalisation. Analogous to the expansion of the backward operator, we can derive the following expansion
for the forward operators in the weak sense:
Theorem 3.2. Let Kε(x, y) be an Ordered Diffusion Kernel under the same assumptions as Theorem 3.1;
then, in the weak sense, the family of adjoint operators, {G∗
ε} admit the following expansion as ε →0 when
applied to a test function f ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M):
G∗
εf(x) := ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε(y, x)f(y)dy = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2),
(19)
where L∗is the formal adjoint of L as given in equation (11), this operator takes the form ([30], p320):
L∗f(x) = −div (f(x)µ(x)) + ∆(D(x)f(x)),
(20)
where µ(x) and D(x) are the normalised first- and second-order moments of Kε, as in defined in equations
(13) and (14), respectively. The normalised adjoint operator can thus be expanded in terms of ε as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗f(x) + O(ε3/2).
(21)
Proof. See Appendix A.2.
The reason we can only take the expansion of G∗
εf(x) up to O(ε3/2) is due to Ωl(x) depending non-trivially
on the second test function required to formulate weak convergence, and thus one cannot simply recombine
this into an expression for G∗
εf(x). Given the expansions of the normalised backwards and forwards integral
operators of theorems 3.1 and 3.2, and defining their respective Laplacians to be:
Lε := 1
ε(Pε −I),
&
L∗
ε := 1
ε(P ∗
ε −I)
(22)
It is then trivial to determine the limiting behaviour of ODKs:
8


Corollary 3.1. Let Kε(x, y) be an Ordered Diffusion Kernel under the same assumptions as Theorem 3.1;
then:
Lεf(x) := (Gε1)−1Gεf(x) −f(x)
ε
= Lf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(23)
L∗
εf(x) := G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f)(x) −f(x)
ε
= L∗f(x) + O(ε1/2).
(24)
where L and L∗are as in equations (11) and (20), respectively.
Proof of Corollary 3.1. Both results follow immediately from the expansions of Pεf(x) and P ∗
ε f(x), given
in Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2, respectively.
This last corollary completes the proof that the family of differential operators {Lε}ε>0 asymptotically
approaches the infinitesimal generator L of an Itˆo process with gradient-flow drift and isotropic diffusion.
It is important to note that the nature of the results given in this section are about a family of continuous
operators (i.e. operators defined directly on the underlying manifold) asymptotically approaching another
continuous operator L = µ·∇+D∆, and we have not yet said anything about the convergence of the discrete
operators we define on real data to the continuous operators we’ve discussed here. The nature of this discrete
to continuous convergence is of great importance and has been studied in detail in the literature (see, for
example, [5, 36, 82, 45, 88, 95, 86, 49]), where almost all results are formulated as convergence in probability,
i.e. the probability of the discrepancy between the discrete and continuous objects being greater than any
small error tends to zero as m →∞. Different authors are concerned with different mathematical objects,
so if one is primarily focused on spectral properties, it might be most fitting to consider the convergence
of discrete eigenvectors to continuous eigenfunctions; but if you are more concerned with the operators
themselves, then (pointwise or uniform) convergence of the discrete operator to the continuous operator
would be more fitting.
For our purposes, we are satisfied with pointwise convergence in probability of
the Laplacian operator; in section 3.3, we will show that under very mild assumptions on the sampling
distribution the discrete Laplacian, Lm,ε, formed by evaluating ODK on dataset of m independent samples
from q(x), will converge to the continuous Laplacian, Lε, as m →∞, i.e. for a fixed and bounded f ∈C3(M),
we will show Lm,εf
P
−−−−→
m→∞Lεf. It is quite reasonable to assume this would always be the case, as if one
had arbitrarily many data points, then one could resolve any function arbitrarily well from its evaluations
across all these points. The complexity of such questions arises when one wants to make the convergence
rate optimal, especially under further regularity assumptions on M (such as bounded Ricci curvature [49])
and f (such as bounded Sobolev norms); then one can significantly tighten one’s results and find regimes
where the convergence rate is much faster. Results such as these are not the main focus of this paper, so
we do not consider such extensions, nor do we attempt to prove a tight convergence rate; but, in section
3.3, we provide a more detailed discussion of the bridge between discrete and continuous data, and state the
pointwise convergence in probability in its most generic form.
Up until now, we have ignored how the boundary of M affects our asymptotics.6 In the proof of Theorem
3.1, we assume that we were a certain large enough distance away from the boundary - more precisely, we
assumed we were at least εγ away from the boundary for some γ ∈(0, 1/2) — so that when ε < 1 we can
define an adequate region around a ball of radius ε1/2 which does not intersect the boundary. In practice, the
data will only allow you to set ε to be so small before you cannot adequately resolve the kernel on the data —
i.e. all the variation and detail of the kernel is happening in the space between observed samples; thus, the
previous condition provides a limit on how close we can get to the boundary before the asymptotics break
down. This has been studied in the literature (see, for example, [21, 100, 7]) and it has been found that the
leading-order errors of the asymptotics given in Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 become of order O(ε1/2) rather than
O(ε) near the boundary; as an example, if ε = 10−4 then the error near the boundary would be of order
∼10−2 which is 100 times larger than in the interior. Critically, most datasets sampled from dynamical
6Topologically, a boundary is ∂X := ¯
X \ ˚
X, where ¯
X is the closure of X and ˚
X its interior, i.e. all points of closure that
are not strictly inside of X. As an example, if we consider D3 = {x ∈R3 : ||x||2 ≤1}, then ∂D3 = S2 = {x ∈R3 : ||x||2 = 1},
which is the 2-sphere, but we see that ∂S2 = ∅, since all points of closure are also inside S2. For topological manifolds, this is
generalised by the addition of charts to the half space Rd−1 × R≥0 at the boundary, it is known that if M is a d-dimensional
manifold with boundary, then ∂M is a (d −1)-dimensional manifold.
9


systems will likely have boundaries, since if the initial conditions are fairly regular, the orbits (paths) will
trace out (cluster around) something similar to a hypercylinder, which necessarily has a boundary. The only
way to correct for these boundary effects is to sample more data points near the boundary so you can resolve
smaller ε’s, but this will just reduce the volume of the problematic boundary region, not remove it entirely.
Thus, it is important to note that ODK will likely experience these boundary effects, and in section 4.2
we show results in figures 3 and 4 where the breakdown in resolution near the boundary is clearly visible.
Musingly, these boundary effects can be mitigated if the data is noisy, such as when we sample from an
ODE in the presence of some measurement noise, or if the data is sampled from an SDE with non-negligible
intrinsic noise. In these cases, the noise effectively blurs the boundary region to the point where one cannot
really tell exactly where the boundary might lie; thus, the kernel sees boundary points more so as outliers
in the data rather than as a fundamental topological limitation7. This results in a less obvious breakdown
in the kernel’s resolution and can be observed in figures 5 and 7 of section 4.3, where, to our eye, the data
clearly has some sort of boundary but the kernel still infers reasonable values for l(x) and ρ(x). Ultimately,
if the data clearly resolves a boundary, one must expect higher errors in these regions, but if the boundary
is blurry, the kernel will perform better than the current theory would suggest.
We do not discuss practical methods for parameterising ODK until section 4.3, but we refer the reader
to Appendix B.3 for a discussion of several heuristic parameterisations that one could utilise for l(x), ε, τ(x)
and ρ(x).
3.1
Generalising ODK to Arbitrary Drifts
In Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 of section 3, we use an ordering function of the form l(x); we do this because the
philosophy of an ordering function is to make ODKs easily applicable to data with very little dynamical
information. This results in the first-order advection term of an ODK’s Laplacian being proportional to
∇l(x); thus, we are restricted to studying the infinitesimal generators of gradient-flow SDEs. In this section,
we will extend ODK to capture arbitrary drifts (analogous to local kernels [11]) by generalising l(x) to a
local ordering function.
As discussed briefly in section 2.2 (and in more detail in Appendix B.1), if one wished to consider more
complex classes of orderings (such as cyclic orders), or one wished to work on domains with non-trivial
homotopy structures (such as a torus), then one needs to relax the assumptions of linearity and global
transitivity of ≤l. Particularly, the relaxation of transitivity to be a local property, leads us to consider
local ordering functions, l : F
x∈M Ux →R, that satisfy l(x, x) = 0 for all x ∈M (which we will see implies
reflexivity), and at every x ∈M defines a locally linear order on Ux through x ≤lx y ⇐⇒lx(y) ≥0 where
lx : Ux →R denotes l(x, ·) with the first argument fixed. We define a locally Ordered Diffusion Kernel
(lODK) to be:
Definition 3.2 (Locally Ordered Diffusion Kernel). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold em-
bedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the ambient space; furthermore, assume that the ∃c > 0 such
that infx∈M inj(x) = c > 0, where inj(x) is the injectivity radius of the exponential map at x — we call
this property bounded geometry.
Let {Ux}x∈M be a family of open neighbourhoods of every point in M
such that the diameters of the Ux are uniformly bounded away from zero. Let Dom(l) = F
x∈M Ux and let
l : Dom(l) →R be a C2 local ordering function of two inputs satisfying l(x, x) = 0 for all x ∈M. Under
the same constraints on h(u), τ(x), ρ(x) and κ(x) as in definition 3.1, we define a locally Ordered Diffusion
Kernel (lODK) to be:
Kε(x, y) = h
∥y −x∥2
ερ(x)2
+ (l(x, y) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2
−
l(x, y)2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2

(25)
The purpose of assuming the injectivity radius of the exponential map is bounded away from zero on
M (a property sometimes referred to as bounded geometry) is to ensure that l(x, y) can always be well-
defined. It is true that for an arbitrary smooth vector field b : M →TM, we can define l(x, y) such that
∇lx(x) = b(x) for all x ∈M. We discuss this in more detail in Appendix B.1, but the gist is to define each
lx locally as lx(y) = yibi(x) where y1, . . . , yd are normal coordinates about x. By the assumption of bounded
7We do not rigorously consider the effects of noise on convergence rates near the boundary, but this would be interesting
future work.
10


geometry, we can always choose a family {Ux}x∈M such that for every x ∈M, the exponential map will
be a diffeomorphism over Ux and diam(Ux) will be bounded uniformly away from zero. By the smoothness
of b and non-degeneracy of {Ux}x∈M, we can smoothly glue these locally defined functions into a globally
defined function l : F
x∈M Ux →R with a partition of unity such that ∀x, y ∈M we will have l(x, y) = lx(y)
and l(x, x) = 0.
Before stating the asymptotic expansions associated to lODKs, it is important to comment on the domain
of both the backward operator and its adjoint: since the local ordering function is defined on the domain
Dom(l) = F
x∈M Ux for a family of subsets {Ux}x∈M with diameter bounded away from zero (always possible
by the assumption of bounded geometry), then the domain of integration for the backwards operator at a
point x ∈M is clearly Ux, since l(x, y) is not defined for y ∈M\Ux. Likewise, for a given x ∈M the domain
of the adjoint (forwards) operator applied to f at x would be Vx := {y ∈M : x ∈Uy}, and since we assume
every Uy is an open neighbourhood of y with diameter bounded away from zero, and x ∈Ux for all x ∈M
(by assumption), then Vx will be an open neighbourhood of x with bounded diameter (since otherwise the
diameter being bounded away from zero would be violated). Furthermore, the intersection Ux ∩Vx =: Mx
will be a neighbourhood of x with diameter bounded away from zero and, when viewing l(x, y) through the
order it implies, will be the largest subset of M containing x, such that all elements y ∈Mx are comparable
to x from the perspective of the local orders at both x and y. In order for the adjoint to be well-defined,
we would wish for the domain of integration to be equal and thus we assume the backwards and forwards
operators are defined as integrals of Kε(x, y)f(y) and Kε(y, x)f(y) over the domain Mx. By referencing the
proof of Theorem 3.1 given in Appendix A.1, for a given value of γ ∈(0, 1/2) — which is chosen to bound
the operator away from the boundary and to define a region of integration, that being the ball of radius εγ
around some x ∈M, outside of which contributions are of order O(ε2) — we must have that B(x, εγ) ⊂Mx,
since Mx is not arbitrarily small, there always exists a εx > 0 below which this will always be satisfied. We
can view this as if we have taken some sensible extension of l(x, y) to all of M × M, since the integral of
Kε(x, y)f(y) (Kε(y, x)f(y)) outside of B(x, εγ) contributes O(ε2) to Gεf(x) (G∗
εf(x)) the terms depending
on the choice of extension are hidden away in the higher-order terms, and thus the limiting behaviour of
Lεf(x) (L∗
εf(x)) is independent of the choice of extension. It is this latter statement that allows us to talk
about the limiting behaviour of lODKs without ambiguity.
Theorem 3.3 (Expansion of locally Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian
manifold with bounded geometry embedded in Rn, and with the metric inherited from the standard Euclidean
metric. Let l(x, y) be a C2(Dom(l)) local ordering function of two inputs and let b(x) = ∇lx(x). For the
local ODK Kε(x, y), as defined in 3.2, and for any f ∈C3(M), we have the following asymptotic expansion
of the associated family of backward integral operators {Gε}ε>0 as ε →0, applied to f:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lbf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2)
(26)
where the second-order differential operator Lb takes the form:
Lbf(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)b(x) · ∇f(x) + D(x)∆f(x)
(27)
In the above, m(x) and D(x) are as in Theorem 3.1. The normalised backward integral operator and its
associated Laplacian (defined in the usual manner) can be expanded as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLbf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = Lbf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(28)
Analogous to the previous theorems, the family of adjoint operators, {G∗
ε}ε>0, satisfies the following asymp-
totic expansion when applied to f ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M), in the weak sense:
G∗
εf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
b(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(29)
where L∗
b is the formal adjoint of Lb and takes the form:
L∗
bf(x) = −div

f(x)τ(x)
κ(x)b(x)

+ ∆(D(x)f(x))
(30)
The normalised adjoint integral operator P ∗
ε f = G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f) and its Laplacian can be expanded as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
bf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
bf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(31)
11


Proof. See Appendix A.3.
When we were considering the global ordering function l(x), we introduced κ(x) as a means to cleanly
make ODK’s independent of the scale of l(x), particularly, if we set κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥then we can make
the ODK entirely agnostic to the scale of l; the same principle holds for lODKs, except one would now set
κ(x) = ∥∇lx(x)∥. We note that in Theorem 3.3, we assumed that l(x, y) was C2 in both arguments, we can
actually relax this to only having l(x,y)
κ(x) be C2 in both arguments.8 Indeed, suppose a : M →R>0, was any
discontinuous strictly positive function, then setting ˜l(x, y) = a(x)l(x, y) and ˜κ(x) = a(x) for some l(x, y)
that is C2 in both arguments, will result in
˜l(x,y)
˜κ(x) = l(x, y) still being C2 in both arguments in spite of ˜l(x, y)
being discontinuous in the first argument. The takeaway from this is that if one is constructing a local
ordering function, one can be less careful when it comes to ensuring l(x1, ·) and l(x2, ·) are commensurate
when x1 and x2 are close to one another, so long as κ(x) is set as to correct for any ad hoc differences in
scale.
Essentially, if one wishes to study dynamics more general than gradient flows, or the topology of the
data (such as domains with non-trivial homotopy groups, e.g. a torus) and/or the ordering (such as cyclic
orderings, e.g. ordering the numbers on a clock) makes the application of a global ordering function unrea-
sonable, then using a local ordering function l(x, y) to encode directionality, and using the associated lODK
to define transition probabilities and to approximate the infinitesimal generator Lb = b · ∇+ D∆, is the best
course of action. As an example of such a dataset, we could consider cell-cycle scRNA-seq data, where cells
go through distinct and well-defined phases (G1 →S →G2 →M →G1 →. . . ) as they grow and divide;
if during each phase it has been shown experimentally that changes in expression of a particular subset of
marker genes uniquely identifies how far along each phase one is, then one could very reasonably define a
local ordering function l(x, y) = P
C∈{G1,S,G2,M} 1(x ∈C)(lC(y) −lC(x)) where 1(x ∈C) is an indicator
function that determines which phase we are in, and each lC is an ordering function constructed based off
the heuristics we have for cells in each respective phase. Furthermore, in this example, the cyclic nature of
the cell-cycle makes it theoretically impossible to define a single global ordering function, l(x), since global
transitivity is violated in cyclic order topologies. In section 4.1, we demonstrate the convergence of the
isotropic and anisotropic ODK as ε →0 on synthetic data sampled uniformly on a torus; due to the cyclic
domain of the torus, a global ordering would produce discontinuities at the boundaries of the glueing and
thus we construct a local ordering function l(x, y) to match the known topology of the data.
As a final comment, if one is unsure whether to use a local ordering function or a global ordering
function on one’s specific data, before committing to one or the other, we recommend applying the method
of Persistent Homology (from the field of Topological Data Analysis, see [28, 101, 17] for more details)
to ascertain if non-trivial topologies are present in one’s data, and if they are, at what scales do they
emerge. Since rotational dynamics, cyclic orderings, and non-trivial homotopies will almost certainly coincide
given our assumptions on data generation outlined in section 2.1, such a preliminary analysis will provide
practitioners with the information they need to decide which formulation is most appropriate given their
specific problem.
3.1.1
Multi-Ordered Diffusion Kernels
In this short subsection, we will write ODK in a manner such that they are compatible with multiple
ordering functions, denoted {li : M →R}k
i=1. The practical motivation for this would be if each li indicated
a preference towards (or maybe (negative) proximity to) a set of distinguished states {si}k
i=1 ⊂M, such as
during stem cell differentiation, where we know the expected gene expression of each differentiated cell type
and thus could compute a distance measure (such as geodesic distance on a connected neighbourhood graph)
for each differentiated state to form each li. Another example, if one interprets each li as being a negative
potential, could be to model a process where there are multiple potential wells that combine non-trivially
to affect the evolution of a system; if each potential can be computed independently but we were unsure of
the relative importance of each field, then it would be useful to apply this directly rather than attempt to
combine the different scales of each potential.
8This condition trivially still implies l(x, y) is C2 in the second argument which is essential in the proof of Theorem 3.3.
12


More theoretically, in Appendix B.1, we discuss how a global ordering function, l(x), as we have concep-
tualised it, is a single utility function representation of a Linear Quasi Order, and the intuition of relaxing
global transitivity to form a locally linear quasi-order was the motivation for defining the local ordering
function l(x, y). A multi-utility representation of a — not necessarily linear — quasi-order, ≤, is a family
of functions {fi}i∈I that satisfies, for all x, y ∈X: x ≤y ⇐⇒fi(x) ≤fi(y)
∀i ∈I; it is true that if X
is a locally compact Hausdorff space that is also σ-compact, then any continuous quasi-order will admit a
continuous multi-utility representation. Relaxing the linearity constraint leads us to consider a (finite) family
of ordering functions, {li}k
i=1, just as relaxing the transitivity constraint led us to consider local ordering
functions. We define a multi-Ordered Diffusion Kernel (mODK) to be:
Definition 3.3 (Multi-Ordered Diffusion Kernel). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold embedded
in Rn and with metric inherited from the ambient space; and let {li : M →R}k
i=1 ⊂C2(M) be a finite set
of ordering functions. A multi-Ordered Diffusion Kernel (mODK) is defined as:
Kε(x, y) := h
 
∥y −x∥2
ερ(x)2
+
k
X
i=1
(li(y) −li(x) −ετi(x)κi(x))2
ερ(x)2κi(x)2
−
k
X
i=1
(li(y) −li(x))2
ερ(x)2κi(x)2
!
,
(32)
where h : R≥0 →R≥0 is a smooth function bounded above by an exponential (∃C, σ > 0 : h(u) ≤
C exp(−u/σ)); {τi(x)}k
i=1 and {κi(x)}k
i=1 are sets of k C1(M) scalar functions with each κi(x) bounded
uniformly away from zero; and ρ(x) is a smooth positive scalar functions bounded uniformly away from zero.
We do not provide the asymptotic expansions of all intermediary results and instead simply state the
form of the limiting operator, which we denote Lm, as:
Lmf(x) =
 k
X
i=1
τi(x)∇li(x)
κi(x)
!
· ∇f(x) + D(x)∆f(x)
(33)
where D(x) is as in Theorem 3.1, and from hereon we denote by µm(x) the advection term of Lm. Once
again, we include the functionality of the κi(x) terms, which allows us to make the kernel agnostic to the scale
of each li(x) by setting κi(x) = ∥∇li(x)∥if one so wishes. The drift is thus a weighted combination of the
directions of increasing order; the fact that each ordering function is weighted independently by a distinct,
state-dependent τi(x) allows for complex combinations of the order directions that could be interpreted as
encoding interactions between different potential fields.
Interestingly, in theory, if one had chosen {li}k
i=1 such that Span({dli|x : i = 1, . . . , k}) = T ∗
xM for
all x ∈M, then we could choose {τi}k
i=1 such that µm(x) is any arbitrary vector-field.
We can show
this constructively: by Whitney’s embedding theorem we know that all Hausdorff, second-countable d-
dimensional smooth manifolds can be embedded into R2d, and the assumptions of our manifold ensure there
is an embedding to Rn, so if k = min(n, 2d),9 and ι : M →Rk was the associated embedding, then setting
li(x) = ιi(x), where ιi(x) is the ith component of ι(x), is sufficient for {dιi}k
i=1 to span the cotangent bundle,
and thus for any vector field b ∈T M, there exist scalar functions {τi}k
i=1 such that b(x) = Pk
i=1 τi(x)∇li(x)
for all x ∈M.
It is worth noting that in the proof of Theorem 3.1, for a given x ∈M we expand l(y) about x and
end up with something approximating Kε(x, y) = h
 (ερ(x)2)−1∥y −x −εµ(x)∥2 + O(ε)

, where the O(ε)
error depends on the choice of ordering function and the geometry of M. From the point of view of the
asymptotics, this is inconsequential, but on real data there is a fundamental limit to how small ε can be
made; thus, if one decides to use a staggering number of ordering functions in an mODK, then under certain
conditions this O(ε) error can accumulate to the point of skewing the kernel and obscuring the underlying
dynamics.
3.2
Generalising ODK to Anisotropic Diffusions
In previous theorems, we restricted ourselves to using isotropic diffusions of the form D(x) =
1
2ρ(x)2Id.
We can extend this to anisotropic diffusions in a natural way but at the cost of coupling the first- and
second-order moments of the Laplacian. We define anisotropic Ordered Diffusion Kernels (anODKs) to be:
9For most manifolds this value of k will be much higher than is necessary.
13


Definition 3.4 (Anisotropic Ordered Diffusion Kernel). Under the same constraints as definition 3.1, the
anisotropic Ordered Diffusion Kernel (anODK) is defined as:
Kε(x, y) := h
(y −x)T A(x)−1(y −x)
ερ(x)2
+ (l(y) −l(x) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2
−(l(y) −l(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2

,
(34)
where A(x) is a symmetric and uniformly elliptic (∃c > 0 such that λmin(A(x)) ≥c for all x ∈M) type
 2
0

-tensor field.10
In this definition, we make a separation between the diffusion driving terms A(x) and ρ(x)2, we do
this for two reasons: firstly, for practical convenience, since the biased order terms are not aware that the
coordinates have been rescaled by A, this separation can help to minimise the coupling that A imparts on the
inferred drift — this will become clear in Theorem 3.4; secondly, we do this so that we can make a distinction
between A(x) acting like a diffusion and like a generalised Riemannian metric. In the former formulation
ρ(x)2 and A(x) act in tandem and combine into the diffusion tensor DA(x) = 1
2ρ(x)2A(x); but in the latter
formulation, since A(x) only appears in the computation of the distance metric (y −x)T A(x)−1(y −x) we
can view this as working on the Riemannian manifold (M, A−1) with non-trivial metric. In the remainder of
this section, we adopt the former interpretation, but in Appendix A.2.1 we discuss the latter interpretation
in more detail.
Theorem 3.4 (Expansion of Anisotropic Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Under the same assumptions as the-
orem 3.1, the anisotropic ODK has the expansion:
Gεf(x) = mA(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + mA(x)LAf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2),
(35)
where mA(x) = m(x)
p
|A(x)| where m(x) is the zeroth-order moment from theorem 3.1. The second-order
elliptic operator, LA, takes the form:
LAf(x) = µA(x) · ∇f(x) + trDA ∇2f(x) = µi
A(x)∂if(x) + Dij
A(x)∂i∂jf(x)
(36)
where in the second equality we have written this operator in Euclidean normal coordinates (and we note that
the trace of a
 0
2

-tensor T with respect to a
 2
0

-tensor B is defined to equal trB T = BijTji). The first- and
second-order moments µA(x) and DA(x) satisfy:
µA(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)A(x)∇l(x) = A(x)µ(x)
(37)
DA(x) = 1
2mA(x)−1
Z
TxM
zzT h
zT A(x)−1z
ρ(x)2

d z = 1
2σh(x)2ρ(x)2A(x) = A(x)D(x)
(38)
where µ(x) and D(x) are the same as in Theorem 3.1. The normalised backward integral operator and its
Laplacian can be expanded in terms of ε as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLAf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = LAf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(39)
Analogously to Theorem 3.2, in the weak sense the adjoint operator satisfies:
G∗
εf(x) = mA(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
A(fmA)(x)) + O(ε3/2),
(40)
where L∗
A is the formal adjoint of the operator LA in theorem 3.4, satisfying ⟨f, L∗
Ag⟩L2 = ⟨LAf, g⟩L2 for
any f, g ∈L2(M), this operator takes the form ([30], p320):
L∗
Af(x) = −div (f(x)µA(x)) + ∆(DA(x)f(x)) = −∂i(f(x)µi
A(x)) + ∂i∂j(Dij
A(x)f(x))
(41)
and the normalised adjoint integral operator and its Laplacian can be expanded as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
Af(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
Af(x) + O(ε1/2).
(42)
10We use the convention that a type
 k
l

-tensor field, T, acts on k-covariant and l-contravariant vectors, i.e.
T
:
F
x∈M(T ∗
x M)k × (TxM)l →R, the space of all such tensors is written T k
l M; a
 2
0

-tensor, A, is uniformly elliptic if all
of its eigenvalues are bounded away from zero, in other words, there exists c > 0 such that all λ which are the solutions to the
equation gjkAkivj = Ai
jvj = λvj, satisfy λ > 0 — if gij = δij this is equivalent to just taking the spectrum of the matrix A(x).
14


Proof. See Appendix A.4.
From the form of µA, we see that in Euclidean normal coordinates the drift is coupled with the anisotropic
diffusion matrix in an analogous manner to how the drift is coupled with the diffusion in the isotropic
TMDmap kernels. Intuitively, this happens because the biased drift term isn’t aware of the ambient coordi-
nate rescaling introduced by A(x). As it is, this may be useful in some scenarios, but for our purposes, unless
A(x) has been defined in such a way as to skew the direction of increasing order towards more dynamically
relevant regimes, it seems like a loss of generality when compared to anisotropic Local Kernels with gradient
flows. We also note that identical results would hold if we had used a local or multi-ordering function, with
µA = Aµb or µA = Aµm in each case, respectively.
We can correct for this coupling by composing two separate kernels together: first, we can construct the
normalised integral operator P µ
ε,α corresponding to the isotropic ODK with τ(x), κ(x) and l(x) identical, but
with the diffusion set to ¯ρ(x)2 := αρ(x)2λmin(A(x)), where α ∈(0, 1) and λmin(A(x)) > 0 gives the smallest
eigenvalue of the matrix A(x) — we assume that A(x) is such that λmin(A(x)) is bounded uniformly away from
zero. We can then also construct the normalised integral operator P A
ε,α corresponding to the anisotropic local
kernel with no drift and covariance matrix ρ(x)2 ¯A(x) := ρ(x)2(A(x)−αλmin(A(x))Id) = ρ(x)2A(x)−¯ρ(x)2Id.
Let the diffusions and Laplacians corresponding to these kernels be denoted by Dµ
α =
1
2σ2
h¯ρ2Id, Lµ
α =
µ · ∇+ Dµ
α∆, and DA
α = 1
2σ2
hρ2 ¯A and LA
α = trDµ
α ∇2, respectively. We also note that indeed:
Dµ
α(x) + DA
α (x) = 1
2σh(x)2¯ρ(x)2Id + 1
2σh(x)2 
ρ(x)2A(x) −¯ρ(x)2Id

= 1
2σh(x)2ρ(x)2A(x) = DA(x).
(43)
It is clear from the results of theorems 3.1 and 3.4 that ¯LA := Lµ
α + LA
α = µ(x) · ∇+ trDA ∇2, is
the operator we desire to reconstruct, and which is the infinitesimal generator of the Itˆo SDE dxt =
µ(xt)dt + ρ(xt)A1/2(xt)dwt, where A1/2(x) satisfies A(x) = A1/2(x)A1/2(x)T for all x ∈M.
However,
it is unsatisfactory to simply sum the two approximations for of Lµ
α and LA
α, since this breaks the chain of
operators which we usually descend, i.e. we will not have an expression for the matrix ¯Pε,α whose Laplacian
ε−1( ¯Pε,α −I) →¯LA as ε →0; thus we seek to first construct ¯Pε,α such that this property holds.
The key insight is that if ¯Pε,α is such an operator, then it should be true that ¯Pε,α = exp(ε ¯LA), where
exp is the operator exponential defining in terms of the power-series of ex. Since ¯LA = Lµ
α + LA
α, we can
construct ¯Pε,α in terms of products of P µ
ε,α ≈exp(εLµ
α) and P A
ε,α ≈exp(εLA
α), but this construction will not
be exact unless Lµ
α and LA
α commute, since in general exp(εLµ
α +εLA
α)̸ = exp(εLµ
α) exp(εLA
α). Approximating
the exponential of an operator from products of exponentials of its components is a well studied problem in
the field of numerical integration (see, for example, [41]), and amounts to generalising different integration
schemes (such as the Euler method, the Verlet scheme, etc). The generalisation of the Euler method gives the
so-called Lie-Trotter approximation (see [90]), given by exp(εLµ
α) exp(εLA
α) ≈P µ
ε,αP A
ε,α, but we notice that
the order of operations matter (i.e. P µ
ε,αP A
ε,α̸ = P A
ε,αP µ
ε,α) and particularly, the order seems to switch upon
taking the adjoint, i.e. if ¯Pε = P µ
ε,αP A
ε,α (or P A
ε,αP µ
ε,α) then ¯Pεf applies the anisotropic diffusion and then the
drift (or applies the drift and then the anisotropic diffusion), but then ¯P ∗
ε f would apply the drift and then
the anisotropic diffusion (or the anisotropic diffusion and then the drift). To ameliorate this asymmetry, and
to reduce the magnitude of the error arising from the choice of composition scheme (see Appendix B.4 for
more details), we choose to use a higher-order method that generalises the Verlet scheme, and which is often
referred to as the Strang Splitting scheme [84]:
¯Pε ≈exp
ε
2LA
α

exp (εLµ
α) exp
ε
2LA
α

≈P A
ε
2 ,αP µ
ε,αP A
ε
2 ,α.
(44)
By applying the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff (BCH) expansion (see [41], Chapter 3.4) we can see that the Lie-
Trotter scheme has leading order error O(ε2) in approximating exp(ε ¯LA), but by repeated application of the
BCH expansion, we see that the symmetric form of the Strang Splitting scheme causes all even order errors
to cancel, and thus the leading order error is O(ε3), thus providing a better approximation for exp(ε ¯LA).
Furthermore, we note that the observed asymmetry between the order of applications between the backward
operator and its adjoint are no longer present; however the order of operations still matters, and we must
choose whether the inner exponential is with respect to P µ
ε,α as we write it in equation (44), or with respect
to P A
ε,α. In section 4.1, we apply the Strang splitting scheme to approximate a known Laplacian, in this
example we found that the form given in equation (44) was more stable to the choice of α and converged
15


faster to the desired Laplacian ¯LA, thus we chose to use this order for our composition. It is our belief that
the best order of operations will most likely depend on which of µ(x) and A(x) is most variable across the
data, with the inner factor of the Strang splitting scheme being the more variable kernel. In most scenarios,
we expect the order of operations given in equation (44) to give the best approximation. We introduce a
parameter α ∈(0, 1) to determine how the anisotropic diffusion is split between the two operators P A
ε/2,α and
P µ
ε,α. In theory, this is a free parameter, but in practice there will be an optimal range of α where the Strang
splitting scheme is most effective; this range will be determined by the manifold, M, and the eigenstructure
of A(x) (see Appendix B.4.1 for a more detailed discussion). Ultimately, if A(x) was isotropic, setting α = 1
would be optimal, hence the optimal splitting of the diffusion will likely amount to making α as large as
possible before P A
ε/2,α degenerates and is no longer able to resolve ρ(x)2 ¯A(x) on the data — thus, the process
of choosing an optimal α is analogous to choosing an optimal bandwidth.
To summarise, we have extended ODKs to anisotropic diffusions at the cost of coupling the drift and
diffusion, analogous to how TMDmap couples drift and diffusion in the isotropic case. We then propose
implementing a Strang splitting scheme to remove this coupling by splitting the anisotropic diffusion between
a standard isotropic ODK, as defined in 3.1, and a symmetric anisotropic local kernel. In Appendix A.2.1,
we interpret A−1 as being a non-trivial Riemannian metric and show how three variations of ODK can be
constructed to approximate the more complex infinitesimal generator in this case.
3.2.1
Self-Tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernels
In what follows, we will demonstrate the limiting behaviour of an ODK after replacing the ρ(x)2 term in
equation 5 with ρ1(x)ρ2(y), where for i = 1, 2, ρi(x) : M →R≥c is a C2 scalar function bounded uniformly
away from zero by c > 0. Such a diffusion doesn’t have a standardised name: it has been called a self-tuning,
adaptive, and locally scaling bandwidth (for example in [99]); but when ρ1 = ρ2, which is almost always the
case, it is often called a symmetric bandwidth (for example in [10]); since we do not impose that ρ1 = ρ2 we
chose to call it the self-tuning bandwidth.11 A self-tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernel (stODK) is thus defined
as:
Definition 3.5 (Self-Tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernel). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold
embedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the ambient space; and let l : M →R be an ordering function.
A self-tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernel (stODK) is defined as:
Kst
ε (x, y) := h
 ∥y −x∥2
ερ1(x)ρ2(y) + (l(y) −l(x) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
ερ1(x)ρ2(y)κ(x)2
−
(l(y) −l(x))2
ερ1(x)ρ2(y)κ(x)2

,
(45)
where h : R≥0 →R≥0 is a smooth function bounded above by an exponential (∃C, σ > 0 : h(u) ≤
C exp(−u/σ)); τ(x) is a smooth scalar function; κ(x), ρ1(x), and ρ2(x) are smooth positive scalar func-
tions bounded away from zero.
The motivation for using such kernels is usually to facilitate variable bandwidths (which is useful on
non-uniformly sampled data as it improves both the fit and the convergence rate, [10]) when working with
unbiased (zero-drift) kernels without making them asymmetric. If we try to make the Diffusion Maps kernel
h(ε−1∥x −y∥2) into a variable bandwidth kernel in a manner consistent with the theory, then one might
define Kε(x, y) = h((ερ(x)2)−1∥x −y∥2), but it would then not be guaranteed that Kε(x, y) = Kε(y, x),
which although not a problem theoretically, will introduce problem computationally, since methods such as
diffusion maps seek to take the eigendecomposition of their (normalised) kernel matrices. Especially when
these matrices are large, it is computationally very important — for reasons such as numerical stability,
computational speed, and to avoid a complex spectrum — that the kernel matrix be symmetric. Thus, the
symmetric bandwidth ρ(x)ρ(y) was introduced in place of ρ(x)2 to solve this issue.
Other than computational convenience, there are good reasons why one might want to use such a band-
width: for example, if your data is very sparse or inhomogeneously sampled (such as scRNA-seq data), then
if you are using your kernel to numerically integrate the Fokker-Planck equation from a known initial condi-
tion, then it may become very challenging to parametrise your transition probabilities so as to transition into
11In this section alone we favour the term bandwidth over diffusion because in most applications a self-tuning bandwidth is
more of an ad hoc construction than an intrinsic quality of the underlying process, thus we feel the term bandwidth creates
some necessary separation between the two interpretations.
16


these sparsely sampled regions; if one sets ρ ∝q−1/d, which is standard in the literature (see, for example,
[13]) and is effectively equivalent to setting ρ(x) = ∥x −xk∥where xk is the kth nearest neighbour to x in
D, (and which follows from q(x) ∝∥x −xk∥−d) — which is just stating that if a point’s neighbours are
further away then that region has been less densely samples — then going from ρ(x)2 to ρ(x)ρ(y) will in-
crease the bandwidth relative to more densely sampled states, thus increasing the probability of transitioning
into sparser regimes. For such ill-conditioned datasets, a self-tuning kernel is thus quite well justified. The
expansion of stODKs is given in the following Theorem:
Theorem 3.5 (Expansion of Self-Tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Suppose M is a d-dimensional Rie-
mannian manifold embedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the standard Euclidean metric in ambient
space. Let l ∈C2(M) be an ordering function (or a local ordering function), and let Kst
ε (x, y) be the corre-
sponding stODK, as defined in (3.5), with self-tuning bandwidth of the form ρ1(x)ρ2(y) for smooth functions
ρ1, ρ2 ∈C2(M) bounded uniformly away from zero. Then for any f ∈C3(M) the associated family of
backward integral operators {Gε}ε>0 admits the following asymptotic expansion as ε →0 when applied to f:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lstf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2),
(46)
at a point x ∈M a distance larger than εγ from ∂M, for a fixed γ ∈(0, 1/2); and where ωl(x) depends on
the manifold and the kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and Ωl(x) depends on the manifold, the kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and
also the test function f(x). The differential operator L is a second-order elliptic operator of the form:
Lstf(x) =

µ(x) + (d + 2)D(x)∇ρ2(x)
ρ2(x)

· ∇f(x) + Dst(x)∆f(x)
(47)
where m(x), µ(x) and D(x), satisfy:
m(x) =
Z
TxM
h

∥z∥2
ρ1(x)ρ2(x)

dz,
µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)b(x),
Dst(x) =
1
2σh(x)2ρ1(x)ρ2(x)
(48)
The normalised backward integral operators and their Laplacians can thus be expanded in terms of ε as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLstf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lst
ε f(x) = Lstf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(49)
Analogous to previous theorems, the family of adjoint operators {G∗
ε}ε>0 satisfies the following asymptotic
expansion, in the weak sense, when applied to f ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M):
G∗
εf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
st(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(50)
where L∗
st is the formal adjoint of Lst and takes the form:
L∗
stf(x) = −div

f(x)

µ(x) + (d + 2)Dst(x)∇ρ2(x)
ρ2(x)

+ ∆(Dst(x)f(x))
(51)
The normalised adjoint integral operator P ∗
ε f = G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f) and its Laplacian can be expanded as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
stf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
stf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(52)
Proof. See Appendix A.5.
An immediate corollary of this result is that it strengthens the proof given by Berry & Harlim in “Vari-
able Bandwidth Kernels” (VBKs, [10]) since in their Appendix A.3 they prove the expansion of the right-
formulation in the weak sense, whereas we do not, and by setting τ(x) ≡0, l(x) ≡0 and κ(x) ≡1 we recover
the form of a VBK. The reason they use the weak formulation is that they seek to make a substitution of
the form ˆy =
y−x
√
ρ2(y) + x, but such a substitution need not be invertible and thus cannot be directly applied.
We do not need to do this to derive our expansion, but if we made the substitution z 7→˜z/
p
ρ1(x)ρx(x) in
the formula for m(x) as given in equation (48), then we would recover the necessary normalisation factors
of ρd/2
1
ρd/2
2
that constitute the difference in convention between ODKs and VBKs.
17


In equation (47), the drift term µ(x) may equal τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x), τ(x)
κ(x)∇lx(x), or Pk
i=1
τi(x)
κi(x)∇li(x) depending
on whether you use a global, local, or multi-ordering function, respectively. We can simplify equation 47 by
assuming h(u) = exp(−u/2) is the prototypical kernel (which implies σh(x)2 = 1), and that ρ1 = ρ2, we can
then write the limiting operator as:
Lst = (µ + 1
2(d + 2)ρ∇ρ) · ∇f + 1
2ρ2∆f =

µ −1
2
d+2
d
∇q
q

· ∇f + 1
2ρ2∆f
(53)
where in the second equality we consider the special case of ρ ∝q−1/d. It is important to note that the
additional advection term coming from the y-dependent bandwidth, and which appears alongside the drift
in equation (47), is not actually a drift from the view of the transition operator Pε and is more of an effective
drift, the transition probabilities are still centred about x + εµ(x) it is just the probabilities surrounding
the mean (which we usually attribute to the noise of an SDE) are skewed in such a way as to to create a
probabilistic flux in the direction proportional to ∇ρ2.
Let us assume for convenience that σh(x) ≡1, then we can introduce a β-regularisation that acts
analogously to diffusion maps α-regularisation, where β ∈[0, 1], and we use a left-bandwidth of the form
ρ1(x)2β and a right-bandwidth of the form ρ2(y)2(1−β). The results are most interpretable when ρ1 = ρ2, so
assuming this, the Laplacian takes the following form:
Lβf = µ · ∇f + (1 −β)(d + 2)ρ∇ρ · ∇f + 1
2ρ2∆f
(54)
We see that when β = 1 (i.e we have a bandwidth ρ(x)2) the additional advection term disappears and we are
back in the standard isotropic ODK case where the diffusion only depends on ones current state (think of this
as the left-formulation of VBK); but when β = 0 (ρ(y)2) we can think of this as being the right-formulation
of VBK where the diffusion is determined by where the state is about to transition, allowing the kernel to
push probability towards higher-bandwidth states (where the meaning of this depends on how you’ve defined
your bandwidth) - this is the least Markov of all values of β. When β = 1/2 (ρ(x)ρ(y)), we can think of this
as the standard self-tuning bandwidth, or symmetric formulation of VBK where the bandwidth is an equally
weighted mixture of the bandwidth in my current state and in my future state. Finally, we note that when
you set β = 2d+3
2d+4 = 1 −
1
2(d+2), then our additional advection terms combines nicely with the diffusion term:
(d + 2)(1 −2d+3
2d+4)ρ∇ρ · ∇f + 1
2ρ2∆f = 1
2ρ∇ρ · ∇f + 1
2ρ2∆f = 1
2ρ∇· (ρ∇f)
(55)
which one might notice as the diffusion term for a Stratonovich SDE dxt = µ(xt)dt + ρ(xt) ◦dwt. This
is interesting, particularly since when one actually defines an SDE intrinsically on the tangent space of a
manifold, the Stratonovich formulation of noise is much preferred [29]. However, following our discussion
of the 1
2ρ∇ρ only being an effective drift, the transition probabilities Pε would not be consistent with the
Stratonovich SDE associated to the generator Lε,1−(2(d+2))−1, since the additional advection from the drift
will be real in the Stratonovich sense.
3.3
Bridging Discrete and Continuous Domains
The results we have given up until now are done in a continuous setting, i.e. all functions can be evaluated on
the entirety of M and the integrals are exact; in other words, there are no gaps in our underlying space. When
we move to discrete data D = {xi}m
i=1 composed of m independent samples x ∼q(x), where supp(q) ⊆M
is the underlying process’s transient distribution — or more broadly just the sampling distribution of the
data. Then we replace our continuous functions with vectors of their evaluations across D, and our integrals
become finite sums that only approximate the integral in the Monte-Carlo sense. We will use the following
square bracket notation to represent the discretisation of continuous functions onto D: assume we fix an
indexing of D, then for any function F : Mk →R, we define [F] ∈Rm⊗k, i.e. a k-dimensional array, that
satisfies [F]ij...k = F(xi, xj, . . . , xk). We use this notation only in this subsection to make it absolutely clear
whether an object is to be seen as discrete or continuous.
The essence of Monte-Carlo integration, is that if I want to approximate
R
M f(x)q(x)dx for any f ∈
L2(M) and where q(x) is a probability density function; then I can sample a large number of points xi ∼q(x)
from this sampling distribution and then compute the arithmetic mean of f(x) evaluated on these points
18


[71]. Precisely, we will have:
lim
m→∞
1
m
m
X
i=1
f(xi)
a.s.
=
Z
M
f(x)q(x) dx
(56)
when xi ∼q(x). The intuition behind this is that the arithmetic mean implicity uses a uniform measure
of the data, but because the data has been sampled from q(x), it will naturally cluster in high-density
regions and then overcount the integral in this region; as a result, you implicitly weight your integral by
the distribution from which your data is sampled. From our perspective, the integral operator Gε could be
approximated as:
1
m[Kε] · [f] ≈
Z
M
Kε(x, y)f(y)q(y)dy

= εd/2[Gε(fq)]
(57)
Depending on one’s data, this implicit weighting by the sampling distribution could be seen as a problem;
but, supposing we know q(x), then we could define KR
ε (x, y) = Kε(x, y)q(y)−1 as we have done before. We
call this the right-normalised kernel, since letting DR := Diag([q]) denote the diagonal matrix with diagonal
entries equalling q(xi), then [KR
ε ] = [Kε]D−1
R - i.e. the sampling distribution normalisation acts on the right
of the discretised Kε. In this case we will have
1
m[KR
ε ] · [f] ≈εd/2[Gεf], and all that is left is to normalise
for the mass of the kernel through DL := Diag
  1
m[KR
ε ] · [1]

≈εd/2[Gε1]; therefore:
[Pεf] = Diag([Gε1])−1[Gεf] = Diag(εd/2[Gε1])−1εd/2[Gεf] ≈D−1
L [Kε]D−1
R · [f] =: Pm,ε[f]
(58)
where in the final equality we are defining Pm,ε = 1
m[Pε] ∈Rm×m
≥0
, and since [Pεf] ≈1
m[Pε] · [f] = Pm,ε[f] =
D−1
L [Kε]D−1
R · [f] is satisfied for any [f] we have that Pm,ε = D−1
L [Kε]D−1
R
- or written elementwise we have
(Pm,ε)ij =
Kε(xi,xj)
Z(xi)q(xj) where Z(xi) = Pm
j=1 Kε(xi, xj)q(xj)−1, which should be recognised as the standard
form of a row-normalised transition matrix. To explain the difference intuitively, as ε gets smaller Pε(x, ·)
gets sharper and more δ-like as a distribution, and thus its maximum value will begin tending to infinity,
but the discrete row-normalised transition probability matrix cannot have entries greater than 1, since all
entries must be positive and the row-sums must equal 1; division by m is what maps the discretisation of
the continuous transition operator to the standard discrete transition matrix.
If we wished to approximate the adjoint operator [P ∗
ε f] = [G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f)] it should now be easy to see
that:
[P ∗
ε f] = ε−d/2
Z
M
q(y)Kε(y, x)
q(y)
f(y)
Gε1(y) dy

≈ε−d/2
m
D−1
R [Kε]T ·
 f
Gε1

= D−1
R [Kε]T D−1
L · [f] =: P ∗
m,ε[f]
(59)
As we hinted at in previous sections, we can now see explicitly that our choice of normalisation results in the
convenient fact that P ∗
m,ε = P T
m,ε, which is exactly as we would expect for a Markov transition probability
matrix. As a final note, Lε := ε−1(Pε −I) ≈L and therefore:
[Lf] ≈[Lεf] = ε−1[Pεf −f] = ε−1 ([Pεf] −[f]) ≈ε−1(Pm,ε −Im)[f] =: Lm,ε[f]
(60)
where Im is the identity matrix in Rm×m. Since this is true for any [f] we can write the familiar expression
for the discrete Laplacian: Lm,ε = ε−1(Pm,ε −Im); as a point of interest we can write this in the less
familiar form of Lm,ε =
1
mε([Pε] −mIm), where we notice that the second term mIm is approximating the
Kronecker δ-function as m →∞since if i̸ = j (x̸ = y) then (mIm)ij = 0 (δ(x, y) = 0), but for any i we
have (mIm)ii = m →∞(δ(x, x) = ∞). Otherwise stated, if δq(x, y) := δ(x, y)q(y)−1, then [δq] = mIm
and [Lε] = ε−1[Pε −δq]. We also note again that L∗
m,ε = LT
m,ε since, assuming everything exists and is
well-defined, the adjoint of the generator will be the generator of the adjoints - i.e. it follows directly from
the fact P ∗
m,ε = P T
m,ε.12
Since Pm,ε is a discrete Markov matrix, we can approximate the derivative of some probability distribution
evolving under Pε and denoted as pt at time t, as [pt+ε] = P T
m,ε[pt], written as a derivative this becomes
∂pt
∂t ≈[pt+ε]−[pt]
ε
= ε−1(P T
m,ε −Im)[pt] = LT
m,ε[pt], when approximated through an Euler scheme - this is
12We have avoided using the notation [Lε] as conceptually we view [Lε] as being a differential operator and not an integral
operator and thus talking about Lε(x, y) does not agree with this formulation. It is not entirely wrong to write [Lε] since Lε
is effectively an integral against the kernel Pε(x, y) −δq(x, y).
19


the discrete Fokker-Planck equation (Kolmogorov forward equation) for a Markov process. We can perform
a similar approximation for the Feynman-Kac equation (Kolmogorov backward equation), yielding ∂ut
∂t =
−Lm,ε[ut], where the negative sign comes from the convention of time going backwards in the Feynman-Kac
formula.
In the literature, particularly in Diffusion Maps [21], they introduce an α ∈[0, 1] parameter to tune
the strength of density regularisation, with α = 0 being no density regularisation, α = 1/2 being their
Fokker-Planck normalisation, and α = 1 being fully regularised. This amounts to defining Kε,α(x, y) :=
Kε(x, y)q(y)−α and only makes sense if we change the integrals for the backward and forward integral
operators to be with respect to the underlying sampling measure q(x). In other words, we now consider the
integral operator:
Gε,αf(x) := ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε,α(x, y)f(y)q(y) dy = ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε(x, y)f(y)q(y)1−α dy = Gε(fq1−α)(x)
(61)
The limiting operator of α-regularised Laplacian takes the form (see Appendix A.3, for a derivation):
Lαf = µ · ∇f + 2(1 −α)D∇q
q · ∇f + D∆f
(62)
We see that if one doesn’t fully regularise for the sampling density, then there will be another advection
term proportional to ∇q that is weighted by a factor of (1 −α). If one progressively increases α from 0
to 1, then the contribution of this additional term decreases. If one wants an exact reconstruction of the
underlying dynamics then one should always consider the α = 1 case; but if one’s data is highly noisy (many
outliers) then pushing the effective drift towards the core concentration of the data may be wise depending
on your ultimate goal. The α-normalised adjoint has an expansion analogous to the previous results given
in Theorem 3.2.
We can also put this together with the β-regularisation proposed in section 3.2.1, this would result in the
infinitesimal generator:
Lα,βf = µ · ∇f + 2(1 −β)(d + 2)D ∇ρ
ρ · ∇f + 2(1 −α)D ∇q
q · ∇f + D∆f
(63)
= µ · ∇f + 2D

(1 −α) −(1 −β) d+2
d
 ∇q
q · ∇f + D∆f
(64)
where the second equality comes from assuming ρ ∝q−1/d, and we can see how the two effective drifts (or
skewed diffusions) act in opposite directions, i.e. setting α = 1 pushes you towards denser regions, and
setting β = 1 pushes you towards sparser regions. Hence, ones choice of α and β depends on the data itself
and the analysis you wish to do: if your data is highly noisy, you should lower α; if your data is very sparse,
you should lower β; if your data is neither then unless essential for further analysis, setting α = β = 1 seems
most reasonable; and if your data is both highly noisy and very sparse, then from equation (64), we can see
that the seemingly sensible choice of setting α = β = 0 will actually be achieving very little when d ≫1,
thus further exploration of the data is required to determine a good parametrisation.
Such results are not novel and have been reproduced many times (for example in [21, 10]), and it just
shows how the sampling density - and the resulting normalisations - affect the differential operator your
Laplacian approximates. Recall, the sampling distribution was introduced into our integral as an artifact of
how Monte-Carlo integration aggregates under non-uniform sampling distributions. But note, the results of,
for example, equation (A.148) are still computed with the continuous operators Pε,α : L2(M, q) ∩C3(M) →
L2(M, q) ∩C3(M), and the results of our theorems are still viewed continuously; to truly bridge the gap
between the discrete operators and the continuous operators, we must show that in the limit of large data13
the action of increasingly large matrices, i.e. Lm,ε, on [f] becomes arbitrarily close to the discretisation of
the continuous operator, i.e. [Lεf], and this should be true independent of any particular sampling of m
data points from q(x). This question has been asked and answered before in the literature, but we state a
similar result here for completeness:
Theorem 3.6 (Discrete Operator Convergence). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold em-
bedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the standard Euclidean metric in ambient space.
Suppose
13Whenever we say “limit of large data” we are implicity taking a limit of m →∞where m = |D|.
20


D = {xi}m
i=1 is a dataset of m independent samples from the sampling distribution q(x) which we assume
satisfies infx∈M q(x) =: cq > 0, i.e. supp(q) = M and q doesn’t decay to zero anywhere on M - this condi-
tion necessitates that M be bounded. Suppose Kε(x, y) is an Ordered Diffusion Kernel and Lε its associated
Laplacian, with the sampling density fully regularised away (α = 1), and suppose, after fixing an indexing
of D, Lm,ε ∈Rm×m is the discretisation of Lε onto D (i.e. [Lεf] ≈Lm,ε[f] =
1
m[Lε] · [f]). Then for any
bounded f ∈L2(M, q) ∩C3(M), i.e. ∃Cf > 0 such that supx∈M |f(x)| = Cf, and any δ > 0:
P
 ∥Lm,ε[f] −[Lεf]∥∞> δ

≤2m exp
 
−
1
2mεd/2+2δ2
Cf(CK + εd/2)(Cf + 1
3εδ)
!
=:(†)
(65)
where CK > 0 is a constant that depends on Kε and q and is independent of D.
Proof. See Appendix A.6.
The result of this is that for a fixed value of ε > 0 and for any δ > 0, we will have (†) = 2m exp(−Cm),
where C > 0 groups all terms inside the exponential that do not depend on m. Since limm→∞2me−Cm = 0
for any C > 0 we have that Lm,εf converges (pointwise) in probability to Lεf. We can also ask how we
may decrease ε as m increases, represented as a function ε(m) so Lm,ε(m) is converging in probability to the
continuous operators Lε(m), and Lε is converging asymptotically to L. For small enough ε > 0 we can group
the terms of the denominator inside the exponential of (†), ignoring the ε dependence, since (after expanding
1
a+bεk ) the εd/2+2 term will dominate. The convergence criteria, for any fixed δ > 0, is that m and ε must
satisfy:
lim
m→∞exp(log(m) −C′mεd/2+2) = 0 ⇐⇒
lim
m→∞log(m)

1 −C′
m
log(m)εd/2+2

= −∞
(66)
so at the very least we must have ε ≥(log(m)/m)2/(d+4)/C′, but to make this convergence decisive (i.e.
independent of C′ and o(1)) then we must have mεd/2+2/ log(m) →∞, but we also desire ε(m) →0 as
m →∞. Thus for any g(m) such that limm→∞g(m) = ∞, and g(m) = o
 (m/ log(m))2/(d+4)
, we can
write:
ε(m) =
log m
m
2/(d+4)
g(m)
(67)
which clearly satisfies mε(m)d/2+2/ log(m) = g(m) →∞, and because g(m) is dominated by (m/ log(m))2/(d+4),
we will still have that ε(m)
m→∞
−−−−→0. Thus, for any bounded f ∈L2(M, q) ∩C3(M), in the limit of large
data the discrete operator applied to f will satisfy Lm,ε(m)f
m→∞
−−−−→Lf = µ·∇f +D∆f, since as m →∞we
have Lm,ε(m)f
P−→Lε(m)f and ε(m) →0 as m →∞, implies we will also have Lε(m)f →Lf. This completes
the story for the convergence of ODK’s, applied to discrete data, to the continuous second-order differential
operator L.
4
Numerical Results
In this section, we will take several idealised examples and demonstrate the limiting behaviour and utility
of ODKs when applied to synthetic data. We will begin in subsection 4.1 by mirroring the example given
in local kernel’s paper [11] and demonstrating the equivalent convergence for ODKs with both isotropic
and non-isotropic diffusions; in subsection 4.2 we will demonstrate how to extract geometric and dynamical
features from data sampled from an ODE; and finally, in subsection 4.3, we will leverage the structure of
ODKs to build two simple gradient based optimisation schemes for scenarios where you do, and do not, have
access to sampling times; we use these optimisers to infer the ordering and diffusion for the underlying SDE
that generated the data.
4.1
Numerical Example: Laplacian Operator
In our first numerical example, we will demonstrate the convergence of the discrete Laplacian to the contin-
uous analytical Laplacians of Theorems 3.1 (isotropic diffusion) and 3.4 (anisotropic diffusion). We will use
the same process as was used in local kernels to demonstrate equivalent convergence [11].
21


Our dataset will be constructed as a uniform mesh of a 2-torus, denoted T 2, embedded in R4: to do
this we first construct a uniform grid of 10,000 points xi = (θi, ϕi) ∈[0, 2π)2 ⊂[0, 2π]2/ ∼=: T 2 — this is
our intrinsic manifold which we take to have the Euclidean metric;14 we then embed these points into R4
through the isometric embeddeding:
ι(θ, ϕ) 7→(sin(θ), cos(θ), sin(ϕ), cos(ϕ)),
Dι(θ, ϕ) =
cos(θ)
−sin(θ)
0
0
0
0
cos(ϕ)
−sin(ϕ)
T
.
(68)
Since M := ι(T 2) is assumed to inherit the Euclidean metric on R4, isometry is equivalent to Dι(x)T Dι(x) =
I2 for all x ∈[0, 2π)2, this can be verified easily from equation (68). We desire an isometric embedding so
that the uniformity of our grid on [0, 2π)2 is preserved on the embedded torus in R4, this will simplify the
analysis. In [13] they define the following dynamics:
µ(θ, ϕ) =
2 + sin(θ)
0

,
C(θ, ϕ) =
3 + sin(ϕ)
1
1
1

(69)
To replicate these dynamics using an ordering function, we first treat l like a potential and define the global
ordering function l(θ, ϕ) = 2θ −cos(θ), which naturally satisfies ∇l(x) = µ(x); however, since the torus
has non-trivial homotopy, and the orbits under µ(θ, ϕ) form cycles, a single global ordering function will be
insufficient due to the branch cut at θ = 2π. Thus, we adapt the global l(θ, ϕ) into a local ordering function
˜l(xi, xj) through:
˜l(xi, xj) =





l(θj, ϕj) −l(θi, ϕi)
if |θj −θi| ≤π
l(θj −2π, ϕj) −l(θi, ϕi)
if θj > θi + π
l(θj + 2π, ϕj) −l(θi, ϕi)
if θj < θi −π
(70)
We will first consider the standard isotropic ODK with ¯ρ2 := 1
2 tr(C(x)) = 1
2(4 + sin(ϕ)) — this is the best
possible isotropic approximation to C(x) as measured by the KL-divergence. Since we are treating l(θ, ϕ)
like a potential, we set τ(x) = κ(x) ≡1, after taking h(u) = exp(−u/2) our ODK can be written as:
Kε(xi, xj) = exp
 
−∥ι(xi) −ι(xj)∥2
2ε¯ρ(x)2
−(˜l(xi, xj) −ε)2
2ε¯ρ(x)2
+
˜l(xi, xj)2
2ε¯ρ(x)2
!
(71)
By the results of Theorems 3.1 and 3.2, we would expect the Laplacian of these kernels to approach:
Lf(x) = µ(x) · ∇f(x) + 1
2 ¯ρ(x)2∆f(x) = (2 + sin(θ))∂f
∂θ (x) + 1
4(4 + sin(ϕ))
∂2f
∂θ2 (x) + ∂2f
∂ϕ2 (x)

(72)
L∗f(x) = −div(µ(x)f(x)) + 1
2∆(¯ρ2f(x)) = ∂
∂θ((2 + sin(θ))f(x)) + 1
4∆((4 + sin(ϕ))f(x))
(73)
We take f(θ, ϕ) = sin(θ) sin(2ϕ) to be our test function, and we found numerically that ε ≈0.0013 was the
optimal value of ε (i.e. the smallest value of ε before the kernel begins losing resolution on the data). In
Figure 1, we show contour plots of Lf (Panel A), L∗f (Panel B), Lf (Panel C) and L∗f (Panel D), where
L and L∗= LT denote ODKs discrete Laplacian and its adjoint, respectively. We can immediately see that
there is very little discernible difference at all between the analytic and the numerical results, with the L2
norm between each being ∥Lf −Lf∥L2 = 0.00791 and ∥L∗f −L∗f∥L2 = 0.01032, respectively.
For our second example, we will apply the anisotropic extension of ODK to the same data using ρ(x)2 =
|C(x)| and A(x) = |C(x)|−1C(x), where C(x) is given in equation (69). From section 3.2 we know that to
approximate the operators:
LAf(x) = µ(x) · ∇f(x) + 1
2ρ(x)2
X
i,j∈{θ,ϕ}
Aij(x)∂i∂jf(x)
(74)
L∗
Af(x) = div(µ(x)f(x)) + 1
2
X
i,j∈{θ,ϕ}
∂i∂j(ρ(x)2Aij(x)f(x)).
(75)
14[0, 2π]2/ ∼denotes the torus constructed by gluing opposite sides of a square in R2 together, we first represent this as a
quotient space [0, 2π]2/ ∼.
22


Figure 1: In this figure, we show the results of applying the isotropic ODK, as defined in equation (71), with
ε = 0.0013, to 104 data points sampled uniformly on a torus embedded in R4. We use a local ordering function
˜l(x, y), as given in equation (70), and define the isotropic diffusion to be 1
2 ¯ρ(x)2 :== 1
4 tr(C(x)), which is the best
isotropic approximation to an anisotropic diffusion when viewed through the metric of KL-divergence. In this figure
we apply the Laplacians and their adjoints to the test function f(θ, ϕ) = sin(θ) sin(2ϕ): in Panel A, we show a
contour plot of Lf as given in equation (72), and in Panel B we do the same for L∗f as given in equation (73).
In Panel C, we show the numerical approximation of ODKs Lεf to Lf, and in Panel D, we do the same for L∗
εf.
Broadly, we see very little deviation between the rows of this figure with the L2-norms between the analytic and
numerical approximations being ∥Lf −Lf∥L2 = 0.00791 and ∥L∗f −L∗f∥L2 = 0.01032, respectively.
23


Figure 2: In this figure, we show the results of applying an anisotropic ODK, as discussed in section 3.2, with
ε = 0.0067, to 104 data points sampled uniformly on a torus embedded in R4. We use a local ordering function
˜l(x, y), as given in equation (70), and seek to approximate the diffusion 1
2C(x), where C(x) is given in equation (69).
We set ρ(x)2 = |C(x)|, and A(x) = |C(x)|−1C(x), we then approximate the normalised anisotropic transition matrix
through the Strang Splitting scheme with the following order of operations ¯P A
ε,α = P A
ε/2,αP µ
ε,αP A
ε/2,α, where we take
α = 2
3. We then apply the associated Laplacians to the test function f(θ, ϕ) = sin(θ) sin(2ϕ). In Panel A, we show a
contour plot of LAf, and in Panel B, we do the same for L∗f. In Panel C, we show the numerical approximation of
ODKs Lε,αf to LAf, and in Panel D, we do the same for L∗
ε,α. Broadly, we see very little deviation between the rows
of this figure, with L2-norms between the analytic and numerical approximations being ∥LAf −LAf∥L2 = 0.0305
and ∥L∗
Af −L∗
Af∥L2 = 0.03518.
We construct two normalised transition matrices P µ
ε,α and P A
ε/2,α: where P µ
ε,α is an isotropic ODK with
drift µ(x) and diffusion ˜ρ(x)2 := αρ(x)2λmin(A(x)); and P A
ε/2,α is a symmetric local kernel with diffusion
ρ2(x) ˜A(x) := ρ(x)2A(x) −˜ρ(x)2I. We then apply our proposed Strang Splitting scheme to approximate
the corresponding normalised transition probability matrix, ¯P A
ε , using the following order of composition
¯P A
ε := P A
ε/2,αP µ
ε,αP A
ε/2,α — we found numerically that this order of operations was more stable to the choice
of α and converged to the true Laplacian LAf (and its adjoint L∗
Af) at a slightly faster rate. We found
numerically that the optimal value of α in this example was approximately 2
3. We also note that the optimal
value of ε increases in this example ε ≈0.0063, which makes sense since the minimal isotropic diffusion of
P µ
ε,2/3, has single eigenvalue of magnitude 2
3λmin(C), whereas the isotropic diffusion of the ODK defined in
equation (71) has a single eigenvalue of magnitude 1
2(λmax(C) + λmin(C)) and the mean ratio between the
two takes the form:
Ex∼q
 1
2(λmax(C) + λmin(C))
2
3λmin(C)

= 3
4E
λmax(C)
λmin(C)

−3
4 ≈5.36
(76)
and 5.36 × 0.0013 ≈0.00697 is close to the optimal value of ε found numerically in the anisotropic example.
In Figure 2, we show contour plots of LAf (Panel A), L∗
Af (Panel B), LAf (Panel C) and L∗
Af (Panel
D), where LA and L∗
A = LT
A denote the non-isotropic ODKs discrete Laplacian and adjoint, respectively. We
can again immediately see that there is very little discernible difference between the analytic and numerical
results, with the L2 norms being ∥LAf −LAf∥L2 = 0.0305 and ∥L∗
A −L∗
A∥L2 = 0.03518, where the slight
increase in the non-isotropic L2 differences from the isotropic L2 differences can likely be attributed to an
increased optimal ε.
24


4.2
Numerical Example: ODEs
We will now consider a more complex example and demonstrate how ODKs can be used to extract dynamic
and geometric features from data sampled from an ODE. Our intrinsic manifold will be the square M :=
[1, 2] × [0, 1] and our embedded manifold will be a 2-dimensional spiral in R3, formed from the embedding:
ι(u1, u2) =


u1 cos(2πu1)
u2
u1 sin(2πu1)

,
Dι(u1, u2) =


cos(2πu1) −2πu1 sin(2πu1)
0
0
1
sin(2πu1) + 2πu1 cos(2πu1)
0


(77)
where we will denote N := ι(M) for clarity. When constructing our dataset D ⊂N we first sample a
100 × 100 grid in [1, 2] × [0, 1] in such a way that our data D is approximately a uniform mesh of the
embedded spiral M: we achieve this be sampling ˜u1 ∈[2, 4] uniformly, and then we define u1 := √˜u1 — this
is not an exact constraint of uniformity but rather a good enough approximation.
Since N will inherit the Euclidean metric, we note that ι : (M, I) →(N, I) is not isometric; so to
compute anything intrinsically we must do so with respect to the metric gM(u) := ι∗gN (u) = Dι(u)T Dι(u) =
Diag(1 + 4π2u2
1, 1) — i.e. the pullback of the metric on N — which guarantees ι : (M, gM) →(N, I) is
an isometry. Hence, the intrinsic manifold will be (M, DιT Dι) and all distances and derivatives computed
intrinsically must be done so with respect to this metric; for example, if f : M →R and v(u) ∈TM, then:
∥v(u)∥2 = v(u)T Dι(u)T Dι(u)v(u) = (1 + 4π2u2
1)v1(u)2 + v2(u)2,
(78)
∇Mf(u) := gradM(f)(u) = (Dι(u)T Dι(u))−1∇f =
∂1f(u)
1 + 4π2u2
1
e1 + ∂2f(u)e2.
(79)
where e1, e2 are the standard Euclidean basis vectors on M ⊂R2. We use ∇f to denote the derivative
of f with respect to the metric g = I2 (i.e. the derivative of f on (M, I)), and ∇Mf := gradgM(f) =
(DιT Dι)−1∇f the derivative of f with respect to the metric gM = DιT Dι (i.e. the derivative of f on
(M, gM)). If we view ˜f = f ◦ι−1 as being f defined on N then the extrinsic derivative of f restricted to
N, which we denote as ∇ext ˜f for clarity, will satisfy ∇ext ˜f = (Dι−1)T ∇f = Dι(DιT Dι)−1∇f = Dι∇Mf,
where in the second equality we noted that since D(ι−1 ◦ι) = Dι−1Dι = I2 this implies Dι−1 = (Dι)+ =
(DιT Dι)−1DιT is a left pseudo-inverse of Dι.
Furthermore, the magnitude of these two gradients with
respect to each of their metrics will also be equal, i.e.:
∥∇ext ˜f∥2
2 = ∇Mf T DιT Dι∇Mf = gM(∇Mf, ∇Mf) = ∥∇Mf∥2
gM,
(80)
This is all to say that in practice we compute extrinsic derivatives on (N, I), but these are identical (after
pushing forward through Dι) to their respective intrinsic derivatives on (M, gM). Let us define ˆt||(u) ∝
Dι(u)e1 to be the unit vector parallel to the spiral but perpendicular to the y-axis, and ˆt⊥(u) ∝Dι(u)e1 ×
Dι(u)e2 to be the inwards-facing unit normal vector to N.
We imagine that on the intrinsic manifold, M, the data is generated by evolving the following ODE from
the initial condition set M0 := {1} × [0, 1]:
du
dt =
u1(2 −u1)
0

=: vin(u)
(81)
We also define sin(u) = ∥vin(u)∥2 = u1(2 −u1). This is equivalent to the spiral being generated in R3 by
evolving the ODE:
dx
dt = Dι(ι−1(x))vin(ι−1(x)) = u1(2 −u1)(1 + 4π2u2
1)1/2 ˆt||(x) =: vext(x),
(82)
where for notational convenience we use u1 = (ι−1(x))1 and ˆt||(x) = ˆt||(ι−1(x)); we also define sext(x) =
∥vext(x)∥2 = u1(2 −u1)
p
1 + 4π2u2
1.
For a given point u ∈M, the timing function t(u) satisfies 1 +
R t(u)
0
[vin(u(t′))]1 dt′ = u1 and can be solved by separation of variables to be:
t(u) = 1
2 log

u1
2 −u1

.
(83)
25


If we generated the data directly on the spiral, then solving the timing function with respect to the ODE
given in equation (82) would very naturally result in an identical timing function; thus, there is no ambiguity
between whether we defined t(u) intrinsically or extrinsically. The gradient of the timing function is naturally
related to the underlying dynamics through:
∇Mt(u) = (DιT Dι)−1∇t(u) =

1
1 + 4π2u2
1
e1eT
1 + e2eT
2

e1
sin(x) =
1
sin(u)(1 + 4π2u2
1)e1
(84)
therefore: ∇extt(x) = Dι∇Mt =

sin(u)2(1 + 4π2u2
1)
−1/2 ˆt||(x), and ∥∇extt(x)∥2
2 =

sin(u)2(1 + 4π2u2
1)
−1,
so in particular the gradient of the timing function is related to the underlying velocity through:
∇extt(x)
∥∇extt(x)∥2 =
sin(u)2(1 + 4π2u2
1)
sin(u)(1 + 4π2u2
1)1/2 ˆt||(x) = sin(u)(1 + 4π2u2
1)1/2ˆt||(x) = vext(x)
(85)
Such a convenient relationship will hold if and only if vin∥vin∥2 is curl-free. Thus, letting τ(x) ≡1, l(x) = t(x),
and κ(x) = ∥∇extt(x)∥2, allows us to define the ODK:
Kε(u, v) = exp

−∥ι(u) −ι(v)∥2
2ερ2
−(t(v) −t(u) −ε∥∇extt(ι(u))∥2)2
2ερ2∥∇extt(ι(u))∥4
+
(t(v) −t(u))2
2ερ2∥∇extt(ι(u))∥4

(86)
by Theorem 3.1 we know the associated drift will equal µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇extl(x) = vext(x). We would now like
to extract this tangent vector from the kernel: since we can think of the normalised backward operator, Pε,
as a transition probability matrix, it would seem natural to define a pointwise velocity estimate as the mean
displacement under the measure Pε(u, ·), i.e.:
ˇvmd(u) := 1
ε
X
v∈D
Pε(u, v)(v −u)
(87)
letting ιi(u) denote the i-th element of the vector ι(u) ∈R3, we can rewrite equation 87 as:
ˇvmd(u)i = 1
ε
X
v∈D
Pε(u, v)(ιi(v) −ιi(u)) = 1
ε
X
v∈D
Pε(u, v)ιi(v) −1
ειi(u) = (Pε −I)
ε
ιi(u) = Lειi(u).
(88)
If for a multivariate function F(x) = (f1(x), . . . , fn(x))T , we define LεF(x) := (Lεf1(x), . . . , Lεfn(x))T , then
the formula for the mean displacement becomes:
ˇvmd(u) = Lει(u) = gM(µ(u), ∇Mι(u)) + 1
2ρ2∆Mι(u) + O(ε1/2) = Dι(u)µ(u) + 1
2ρ2H(u) + O(ε1/2)
(89)
where H(u) is the Mean Curvature Vector (MCV) of the spiral, and encodes the curvature introduced
through the embedding: this term appears since the Laplace-Beltrami operator applied coordinate wise
to an embedding into a Euclidean space satisfies ∆Mι(u) = trgM Π(u) =: H(u) where Π(u) is the second
fundamental form (the proof of this is given on Pg. 41 of [18]) — by definition of the second-fundamental
form, H(u) will be normal to the embedded manifold M. As we’ve already discussed, the first-order term in
this expansion will equal vext(ι(u)), and thus, in the limit, the mean displacement estimate of the velocity
will equal:
lim
ε→0 Lει(u) = vext(ι(u)) + 1
2ρ2H(u)
(90)
The first term is the embedded velocity field we want to estimate, and the second term is perpendicular to
this velocity and proportional to the MCV. To untangle the contribution of each component, we define the
following two improved estimates of the embedded velocity field:
ˇvsym(u) = (Lε −Lsym
ε
) ι(u)
(91)
ˇvproj(u) =

I −ˆN(u) ˆN(u)T 
Lει(u)
(92)
26


Figure 3: In this figure, we show the results of applying an ODK to a lattice of 104 points (sampled uniformly with
respect to the metric DιT Dι) non-isometrically embedded in R3 through ι : M →R3 as given in equation (77), to
form a 2-dimensional spiral. We supposed this data was generated by evolving the ODE dx
dt = vext(x) from the initial
condition set ι({0}×[0, 1]) ⊂R3, where vext(x) is given in equation (82). We parametrised our ODK, which is given in
equation (86), through: l(u) = t(u), where t(u) is the timing function of the ODE, κ(u) = gM(u)(∇Mt(u), ∇Mt(u))
and τ(u) ≡1, which amounts to the ODKs drift being equal to vext(ι(u)); and ρ(x) ≡2. In Panel A and Panel B,
we show two estimates of the extrinsic velocity (in the first and third dimensions) obtained from our ODK: the dashed
black line shows the analytic components of the velocity; the solid blue line shows the mean displacement estimate,
ˇvmd(u); and the solid red line shows the symmetric corrected estimate ˇvsym(u) = (Lε −Lsym
ε
)ι(u), where Lsym
ε
is the
Laplacian corresponding to a symmetric local kernel with diffusion
1
2ρ2 = 2. Across both panels, we see that the
addition of the normal Mean Curvature Vector (MCV) to vext(u) displaces ˇvmd(u) away from the analytic values,
whereas ˇvsym(u) corrects for this and is almost entirely aligned with the analytic. The only discrepancy occurs at the
boundaries, where the kernel can no longer resolve the diffusion, but we see that this effect is mitigated in ˇvsym(u)
because boundary errors cancel when subtracting the two Laplacians. In Panel C, we show three estimates of the
first component of the intrinsic velocity field µin(u), as given in equation (81), again the black dashed line shows
the analytic expression, the solid blue line shows the embedding aware estimate Dι−1(ι(u))Lει(u), the orange line
shows the mean displacement estimate applied directly to the intrinsic data (using the intrinsic Laplacian Lin
ε with
ρin ≡
2
lspiral where lspiral ≈9.48 is the arclength of the spiral), and the solid red line shows the symmetric corrected
estimate, (Lε −Lsym
ε
)u, applied directly to the intrinsic data. All three estimates are highly aligned with the true
values, but only the symmetric-corrected estimate can mitigate boundary effects.
where the first estimate subtracts a symmetric local kernel (which should use the same kernel wrapper h(·)):
we do this because limε→0 Lsym
ε
ι(u) = 1
2ρ2H(u) and thus limε→0 ˇvsym = vext(u). In the second estimate, the
columns of the matrix ˆN(u) form an orthonormal basis of Nι(u)M ∼= Rn−d, if such a matrix can be easily
computed given ones data — such as for our 2-dimensional spiral embedded in R3 in which ˆN(u) = ˆt⊥(u)
— then ˇvproj(u) will remove the MCV without the need to evaluate another kernel; the issue is when d is
unknown and whatever it is, we will have n ≫d, this may result in us needing to estimate the intrinsic
dimensionality of M, which in general we do not wish to do, and the extraction of a large basis of the normal
bundle. Due to this latter consideration, we favour the use of the symmetric corrected velocity estimate
given in (91), over the projection corrected velocity estimate.
If instead of the extrinsic velocity field, one wished to estimate the intrinsic velocity field, vin(u), then
one would need to have knowledge of the embedding itself since vext(ι(u)) = Dι(u)vin(u), which implies
vin(u) = (DιT Dι)−1Dι(u)vext(ι(u)), again using Dι−1 = (Dι)+, we could then esimate vin(u) through:
ˇvin(u) = (DιT Dι)−1DιT Lει(u) = (DιT Dι)−1DιT Dι vin(u) + 1
2ρ2(DιT Dι)−1DιT H(u) = vin(u)
(93)
where we use the fact that H(u) is normal to M, and thus Dι(u)T H(u) = 0. If we don’t have knowledge of
the embedding but we did have access to the intrinsic data ι−1(D), then we could define a new Laplacian Lin
ε
on this data, and since we have assumed their exist global coordinates on M, the metric will be the trivial
Euclidean metric and thus:
ˇvin(u)i = Lin
ε ui(u) = vin(u) · ∇ui(u)) + 1
2ρ2∆ui(u) = vin(u) · ei = vin(u)i.
(94)
In Figure 3, we show the results of applying the ODK given in equation (86) with ρ(u) ≡2 and ε = 0.0015.
In Panels A and B, we show the analytic expression for [vext(u)]i, for i = 1, 3, respectively, as the dashed
27


Figure 4: In this figure, we demonstrate how a symmetric local kernel can be used to estimate the Mean Curvature
Vector (MCV) of a manifold, M, under an unknown embedding in ι : M →Rn.
We apply a symmetric local
kernel Ksym
ε
= exp
 −(ερ2)−1∥x −y∥2
, with constant diffusion
1
2ρ2 ≡1, to a lattice of 104 points sampled in
M := [1, 2] × [0, 1], non-isometrically embedded in R3 through ι : M →R3 as given in equation (77), we sampled
our lattice on M with respect to the pullback of the Euclidean metric through ι (i.e. with respect to DιT Dι). In
Panel A and Panel B, the dashed black line shows the analytic MCV in the first and third dimensions, as given in
equation (95); the solid red line shows the estimated MCV, computed as in equation (96). We see there is very little
misalignment between the analytic and estimated MCV, except at the boundaries where the kernel can no longer be
resolved sufficiently and the estimate degrades (we show this degradation with dashed red lines). In Panel C we
show a quiver plot evaluated on a 25 × 25 subgrid of D, where arrows with a blue hue show the velocities estimated
through ˇvsym(u), as in equation (91), and arrows with a red hue show the estimated MCVs, ˇH(u), as in equation
(96). The strength of the hue of the arrows is determined by their magnitude, and we note that we have rescaled the
arrows by a multiplicative factor of 0.025 (velocities) and 0.2 (MCVs) to make their lengths comparable.
black line; the solid blue line shows the mean displacement estimate ˇvmd(u) = Lει(u) ≈vext(u) + 2H(u)
which can be seen to capture the rough outline of the embedded velocity field but is clearly offset in both
the first and third dimensions by the addition of the normal MCV; the solid red line is our symmetric kernel
corrected velocity estimate, ˇvsym(u), as given in equation (91), and we can see clearly that there is a very
high degree of alignement between this estimate and the analytic solution, with the only deviations being
at the left boundary (i.e. u1 ≈1). This latter observation is a realisation of the boundary effects discussed
in section 3; as we noted, these effects are mostly unavoidable when the boundary is properly resolved by
the data. However, when comparing ˇvsym(u) = (Lε −Lsym
ε
)ι(u) to ˇvmd(u) = Lει(u), in Panels A and B,
we notice that the observed erros near the boundary for ˇvsym are of a much smaller magnitude that for
ˇvmd: this is because the boundary error is realised in Lε and Lsym
ε
in roughly equal proportions, and thus
when we subtract the two Laplacians the two sources of error cancel; the only error that we still observe
is when u1 ≈1, and in this case vext(u) is large and thus ODKs diffusion resolves better (less error) than
the symmetric local kernel because u + εvext(u) is further away from the boundary than u. We do not show
the estimates of ˇvproj(u) as it is mostly identical to ˇvsym(u), with the only difference being that near the
boundary ˇvproj(u) behaved similarly to ˇvmd(u), since we do not have the convenient error cancellations as
we do with ˇvsym(u).
In Panel C of Figure 3, we show 3 estimates of the intrinsic velocity field vin(u), where again the dashed
black line gives the true values, the solid blue line gives the embedding aware estimate as given in equation
(93), the solid red line gives the velocity estimate after applying the symmetric correction directly to the
intrinsic data (i.e. (Lε −Lsym
ε
)u1(u)), and the orange line shows the result of recomputing the Laplacian
directly on the intrinsic data to form Lin
ε (we set ρin =
2
lspiral in this construction, where lspiral ≈9.48 is
the arclength of the spiral), and applying it to the coordinate functions. We see that all three estimates
are highly aligned with the analytic solution, with the only divergences occurring at the boundaries: the
symmetric estimate is the least affected for the same reason as before.
In Panels A and B of figure 4, the dashed black line shows the analytic MCV in the first and third
dimensions, respectively, where the analytic expression of the MCV is computed from the embedding and is
28


given below:
H(u) = 4π(1 + 2π2u2
1)
(1 + 4π2u2
1)2


−sin(2πu1) −2πu1 cos(2πu1)
0
cos(2πu1) −2πu1 sin(2πu1)

= 4π(1 + 2π2u2
1)
(1 + 4π2u2
1)3/2 ˆt⊥(u)
(95)
The solid red line in both of these figures shows the estimated MCV (in the first and third dimensions)
obtained from computing:
ˇH(u) = 2
ρ2 Lsym
ε
ι(u)
(96)
From both of these figures, we see that the estimated and analytic forms only diverge from one another near
the boundaries, and are otherwise almost perfectly aligned.
In Panel C of figure 4, we show a quiver plot on a 25 × 25 subgrid of points of D: arrows with a blue
hue show the estimated velocities (computed using the symmetric correction, ˇvsym(u)), and arrows with a
red hue show the estimated mean curvature vector computed as in equation (96). The arrows have been
rescaled by a factor of 0.025 and 0.2, respectively, to make them visually comparable (this choice of scaling
reflects the fact that E[∥H(u)∥] ≈1
8E[∥µext(u)∥]). The strength of the hue of the arrows is determined by
their magnitude, with darker colours corresponding to vectors of greater magnitude. We can see from this
plot that, as expected, the MCV is normal and the velocity is tangent to the manifold. In panels A and B
of 3, the discrepancy between Lει(u) (the blue line) and the analytic velocity (the dashed black line) can be
explained by the addition of the MCV vector to the extrinsic velocity. We also observe in Panel C of figure
4, that the further along the spiral one goes (increasing u1) the smaller the magnitude of the MCV — which
is highly intuitive since the spiral becomes increasingly flat the further away it is from the origin — thus,
the additional normal component in the estimate ˇvmd(u) becomes progressively smaller as one traverse the
spiral.
4.3
Numerical Example: Parametrising SDEs
To demonstrate how ODKs might be used on data sampled from an SDE, we will take a more practical
approach and define two maximum-likelihood objectives that use the rigid structure of ODKs with respect
to their dynamic parameters to set up a gradient-based optimisation for exactly these dynamic parameters.
The choice of which objective to use depends on whether or not you are provided with sampling times.
4.3.1
SDE with known Time Sampling Distribution
For this example, we generate our data, D, by sampling from a d-dimensional Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)
process with independent components and constant isotropic noise; the SDE for this process will take the
form:
dxt = −Diag(Θ)xtdt + σdwt,
(97)
where Θ ∈Rd
>0, and wt is a Wiener process. We define the time sampling distribution for our data to be a
mixture of Gaussians truncated over the interval [0, T] with T < ∞, i.e.:
t ∼r(t) := Trunc
 
1
sr
sr
X
i=1
N(t; ¯ti, σi); [0, T]
!
(98)
where N(µ, σ) is a normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ2, and {¯ti}sr
i=1 ⊆[0, T]. We independently
sample from the OU process defined in equation (97) as discussed in section 2.1, by first sampling a time
t ∼r(t), and then sampling x ∼
R
M p0(x′)pt(x|x0 = x′)dx′; for both this and the next example we assume
p0(x) = δ(x −x0) for a fixed and known x0, although we note that we need not make this restriction. In
this example we assume that we are not provided with sampling times T := {ti}m
i=1, and instead only have
knowledge of the sampled states D = {xi}m
i=1, the time sampling distribution r(t), and the fixed initial
condition x0.
Given this setup, there is no pointwise dynamical information from which we could estimate the param-
eters of the underlying SDE; indeed, we do not even have coarser time marginals from which to compare
29


aggregated statistics such as moments. However, if we model the SDE as a spatially and temporally discrete
Markov process, whose state space is the data D, and whose jumps are over a fixed time-interval ε > 0,
then we can represent this process through the row-stochastic transition probability matrix Pε(Φ), where
Φ = (ϕ1, . . . , ϕ|ϕ|) ∈R|ϕ| is our vector of dynamic parameters,15 this will be the normalised backward opera-
tor of Theorem 3.1, and from Theorem 3.2, we know that the adjoint P ∗
ε (Φ) = Pε(Φ)T , so we can represent
applying the backwards operator to a function by multiplying a vector of this function’s evaluations across
D on the right of Pε(Φ), and likewise multiplication of a transposed vector on the left will represent the
application of the forward (Fokker-Planck) operator. Given this transition operator, we can compute the
expected transient distribution given the parameterisation Φ, on data sampled through the time-sampling
distribution r(t), through:
ˆq(xi|Φ) :=
S
X
s=1
¯rε(s)pT
0 Pε(Φ)sei,
(99)
where: ¯rε(s) = r(sε)/ PS
s′=1 r(s′ · ε) and S :=
 T
ε

; p0 ∈Rm
≥0 is our discretised initial condition vector which
could reasonably be set to a δ-distribution on the closest sample in D to x0, or maybe a small variance
symmetric Gaussian around x0; and [ei]j = δij is a vector of zeros at every coordinate except the i-th in
which it is one. The sum in equation (99), should be interpreted as a weighted Monte-Carlo sum and is thus
approximating the true sampling distribution integral as given in equation (2). By comparing how similar
ODK’s estimated ˆq(xi|Φ) is to the true sampling distribution, q(x), we can formulate an objective that we
can attempt to minimise; using the KL-divergence, DKL(·||·), as our measure of closeness, we define:
Lq(Φ|D, r, x0, λreg) := DKL(q(x)||ˆq(x|Φ)) + λregR(Φ|D) ≈−1
m
m
X
i=1
log ˆq(xi|Φ) + λregR(Φ|D) + const (100)
where R(Φ|D) denotes some regularisation function on the parameters Φ, and λreg ≥0 is a hyperparameter
controlling the strength of this regularisation. The approximate equality arises when the integral in the KL-
divergence is approximated using Monte-Carlo integration. The approximate solution of this optimisation
problem is then:
Φ∗:= arg min
Φ
−1
m
m
X
i=1
log ˆq(xi|Φ) + λregR(Φ) ≈arg min
Φ
Lq(Φ|D, r, x0, λreg)
(101)
The most general and non-parametric approach to parameterise our ODKs is to learn the functions that
determine our kernels as vectors of those functions evaluated across D, i.e., we wish to learn [f] ∈Rm where
[f]i = f(xi) and f = τ, ρ, or l. Since τ(x) controls the speed of the process in the direction
1
κ(x)∇l(x)
it does not seem necessary to try and learn τ(x) and l(x) simultaneously; therefore, depending on how
good an ordering function we can initially construct we decide to learn either Φ = ([τ], [ρ]) with l(x) and
κ(x) fixed at the beginning of our optimisation, or we learn Φ = ([l], [ρ]) with τ(x) = κ(x) ≡1 fixed -
this treats l(x) as a potential function that controls the deterministic dynamics of the process. Given this
naive parameterisation, it seems sensible to impose some smoothness constraints on our dynamic parameters;
for this reason, we define the following two smoothness regularisation functions that we will refer back to
throughout this section:
Rgrad(f) =
Z
M
∥∇f(x)∥2dx ≈1
m
m
X
i=1
∥Greg
i
(fNi −fi1Ni)∥2,
(102)
Rlap(f) =
Z
M
|∆f(x)|2dx ≈1
m∥Lregf∥2,
(103)
which we refer to as gradient regularisation and Laplacian regularisation, respectively.
Both are chosen
to promote smoothness of the learned functions. To solve this optimisation problem we will use gradient
based optimisation (we choose to use the L-BFGS algorithm [65, 59] as implemented in [51]) where we will
15When we say dynamic parameters, we mean the scalar functions τ(x), ρ(x) and l(x) that are inputs to an ODK and which
we represent as vectors of their evaluations across D.
30


Figure 5: In this figure, we show the results of applying the Lq objective (equation (100)) to learn the ordering function
(equivalently, the negative potential) and constant diffusion of a 2-dimensional OU process with Θ = (1.8, 1.2)T and
ρgt =
√
2; we evolved from process from x0 = (5, 5)T over the time horizon [0, 2] with time sampling distribution, r(t),
formed as the truncated mixture of two Gaussians centred at t1 = 0 and t2 = 2 and with standard deviations both
equal to 0.6. In Panel A, we visualise the ground truth ordering function lgt(x) = −1
2
Pd
i=1 θix2
i + C, with C such
that minx∈D lgt(x) = 0; as expected, the lowest-order samples lie near x0 and the highest near the steady state at the
origin. In Panel B, we show the estimated order and noise function after minimising the Lq objective using L-BFGS
[59]; we take ε = 0.04, and use gradient regularisation on the ordering (equation (102), λreg = 0.00167). We see
that the functions represented in Panels A and B are an incredibly close match (Pearson correlation ≈0.999), with a
slight inflation of the mean order, Ex∼q[lest] = 33.3 versus 32.5 (2.43% relative difference). In Panel C, we plot the
estimated order against the ground truth order, with the red dashed line being the Line Of Best Fit (LOBF) between
them. The near-perfect collinearity and near-negligible spread perpendicular to the LOBF indicate the estimated
order truly recovers the dynamics and thus the foliating structure of lgt(x) on M. From Panel C, we can spot two
outlying estimates: the minimum-order sample (Panel C, bottom-left) and the maximum-estimated-order sample
(Panel C, top-right), which correspond to the samples with the largest and smallest x2, respectively. The estimated
diffusion ρest ≈1.39 is within 1.38% of the true ρgt =
√
2 ≈1.41.
exploit the rigid structure of an ODK in terms of the functions τ(x), ρ(x) and l(x) to compute the gradient
analytically. We give a full description of how we do this, and how we construct the gradient and Laplacian
regularisation functions of equations (102) and (103), in Appendix B.6.
In our first example, we will apply the Lq objective given in equation (100), to data sampled from a
2-dimensional OU process — with known x0 = (5, 5)T and r(t) = Trunc
  1
2N(0, 0.6) + 1
2N(2, 0.6); [0, 2]

(i.e. we evolve the process over the interval [0, 2]), and with unknown Θ = (1.8, 1.2)T , and σ =
√
2I2 — to
attempt to learn Φ = ([l], ρ) ∈Rm+1, where [l] ∈Rm is an ordering function (here effectively viewed as a
negative potential) represented as its evaluation across D = {xi}m
i=1, and ρ ∈R>c, for some small c > 0, is
a constant diffusion parameter; in total we have m + 1 parameters to learn.
In figure 5, we show the results of applying this optimisation: in panels A and B, we visualise the ground
truth order and estimated order, respectively, and observe very little discernable different between the two,
the relative error of this estimate averaged across D being approximately 2.43%, and the L2-norm between
them being ∥lgt −lest∥L2 ≈0.947. This alignment is more explicitly shown in panel C, where we plot the
estimated order against the ground truth order and observe that they are almost perfectly collinear, having a
Pearson correlation of 0.999, which illustrates how the optimisation was able to infer even the fine structure
of the implied ordering (negative-potential) of this process simply by numerically integrating ODK time-
marginals of the process restricted to its samples. Furthermore, the ground truth and estimated ρ’s were
equal to ρgt(x) ≡
√
2 ≈1.414 and ρest(x) ≡1.395, respectively, giving a relative error of 1.38%, and showing
that the Lq objective is capable of isolating a signal left by the underlying noise that generated the data
in the geometry (relative spacing and connectivity) of the samples. What is particularly noteworthy about
these results is how little dynamical information we needed: recall that we only provided the model with the
time-sampling distribution r(t), the spatial sampling distribution q(x), and an initial state x0. The initial
state implies a distance from where all samples started, that surely correlates with the underlying order the
process implies, and simply by restricting our representation of the process to only consider sample-to-sample
transitions, and constraining the transition probabilities to be like ε-timestep Itˆo transitions, the Lq-objective
and ODK representation of the process are capable of performing a non-linear adaptive fitting between the
31


Figure 6: Ground truth ordering function (Panel A) and ground truth noise function (Panel B), as given in
equations (105) and (104), respectively. We evaluate these functions on 2,500 independently sampled points from the
NL Process with x0 = (0, 0)T and r(t) = Unif([0, 4]).
naive implied distance from x0 and the true underlying order. We can also simultaneously isolate a signal
from the intrinsic noise encoded into the geometry of the data.
4.3.2
SDE with known Sampling Times
For our final example, we consider a more parametrically complex SDE with non-linear drift and diffusion
(where the diffusion is now a function of the state variables); however, we now assume that we are provided
with the sampling times for each data point. The Non-Linear SDE (that we hereon refer to as the NL
process) has the following form:
dxt,i =
3
2 sin
  1
2xt,i

+
1
2π2 (4π2xt,i −x3
t,i) exp

−1
4x2
t,i

dt + 1
2
q
1 + 1
8 (∥xt∥−2π)2dwt,i,
(104)
where xt,i denotes the ith component of the state x at time t for i = 1, 2; we use two independent Wiener
processes to generate the noise in this SDE, thus corresponding to an isotropic diffusion.
The ordering
function (negative potential) corresponding to this process takes the form:
l(x) = −
2
X
i=1
3 cos
  1
2xi

+ 1
π2 (4(π2 −1) −x2
i ) exp
 −1
4x2
i

,
(105)
To sample our data, we fix x0 = (0, 0)T and define our time-sampling distribution to be uniform on the
interval [0, 4], i.e. r(t) = Unif([0, 4]); as before, for i = 1, . . . , m, after sampling ti ∼r, we then sample
xi ∈pt(x|x0 = (0, 0)T ), and store the sampling times and state samples in the sets T = {ti}m
i=1 and
D = {xi}m
i=1, respectively. In panels A and B of Figure 6, we plot the ordering function, as given in equation
(105), and the noise function, as given in the second term of equation (104), respectively, over a dataset of
2,500 independent samples from the NL process. We can see from panel A that the NL process has 4 steady
states located at (±2π, ±2π), and from panel B we observe that the diffusion is strongest nearer the initial
condition and decays once a state appears to have committed to travelling along one of the four possible
branches; finally, we note that there is a small increase in the magnitude of the noise when ∥x∥> 2π, this
creates a potential well around the circle of radius 2π.
In what follows, we only assume that we are given the sampling times T = {ti}m
i=1, the sampled states D =
{xi}m
i=1 (where xi was sampled at ti), and the initial state x0. Since we have more dynamical information in
this example than in the previous example, we define a new, stronger objective that intrinsically incorporates
the time sampling distribution (in a Monte-Carlo sense) and acts as a full maximum likelihood over the joint
distribution p(x, t) = r(t)pt(x|x0). We define the Lp objective to be:
Lp(Φ|D, T , x0, λreg) := DKL(p(x, t)||ˆp(x, t|Φ)) + λregR(Φ|D) ≈−1
m
m
X
i=1
log ˆp(xi|ti, Φ) + λregR(Φ|D) + const.
(106)
32


This is a standard maximum likelihood objective, where we have used the fact that r(t) does not depend on
the parameters of the SDE (by assumption). In the above equation, ˆp(xi|ti, Φ) is the estimated probability
of being at the state xi at time ti given our ε-timestep ODK transition probabilities, Pε(Φ). The simplest
estimate of this function defines si =
 ti
ε

and letting ˆp(xi|ti, Φ) = ˆpsi(xi|Φ) := pT
0 Pε(Φ)siei, but we can
generalise this further by linearly interpolating between discrete time-steps through:
ˆp(xi|ti, Φ) = aipsi−1(xi|Φ) + bipsi(xi|Φ) = aipT
0 Pε(Φ)si−1ei + bipT
0 Pε(Φ)siei,
(107)
where ai =
 1 −
 si −ti
ε

and bi =
 si −ti
ε

. As with the Lq objective used in the previous example we
can consider the parameters of this objective to be any of the dynamic functions l(x), τ(x) or ρ(x) evaluated
at each of the data points xi, and it is again possible to compute the gradient of this objective analytically
in a single forward pass due to the rigid structure of our ODKs with respect to these parameters, a rigorous
description of this computation for the Lp objective with linearly interpolated probability estimates is given
in Appendix B.6. In what follows, we will again optimise for the ordering function, l(x), and the now state-
dependent noise, ρ(x); we continue to employ the L-BFGS algorithm to solve our optimisation problem.
It is now worth discussing the issue of parameter identifiability for our proposed objective. To emphasise
the issue, suppose the optimiser wished to push probability from one region into another: it could do this
by increasing the ordering in this direction and thus creating a deterministic flow towards it; but it could
also create a diffusion well around this new region; this would create an effective advection proportional to
−ρ∇ρ stochastically driving probability into the bottom of this well. Thus, when one’s diffusion depends on
the state variable, the optimiser must disentangle where advection is driven deterministically and where it is
driven stochastically. As an example of this issue, it has been shown experimentally that, for a small subset of
genes, stem cell differentiation (which is a process most often modelled as being primarily deterministic) can
actually be modelled accurately through an entirely diffusive process with state-dependent diffusion creating
a well near the differentiated state [48]. The question of identifiability boils down to whether it is always
possible for the optimiser to learn this balance between determinism and stochasticity given the Lp (or Lq)
objective. Since the Lp objective requires sampling times, the signal of the noise in the data likely comes from
two sources: the distribution of samples (as with the Lq objective), where sparser regions can be associated
with larger diffusions; and the local variances of sampling times, which we refer to as time uncertainty,
this fundamentally will be a function of the total diffusion a state has experienced in getting to any given
point. Thus, if the optimiser overuses a diffusion gradient to push the probability forward, the subsequent
evolution will be mostly deterministic, resulting in lower time uncertainties than observed — recognising
this discrepancy should allow the model to identify the true noise values. The issue is that unless your
sampling measure was uniform (highly unlikely for complex dynamics), or you had a tremendous amount of
data, you will always have (pointwise) noisy estimates of the time uncertainty and thus one’s estimates of
the diffusion cannot help but be noisy. As we will see in the remainder of this section, it does seem possible
to simultaneously infer the correct drift and diffusion using the Lp objective, although the estimates of the
diffusion can be very noisy and the addition of smoothness regularisation functions (such as those given in
equations (102) & (103)) is capable of distorting the local minima away from the true diffusion. We take this
as weak empirical evidence that our optimisation is identifiable, but poorly conditioned for state-dependent
noise; we do not prove a result of this sort in this paper but this would be highly relevant future work, we
provide a more detailed discussion of identifiability in Appendix B.7.
A practical issue remains: even with the information contained in our time uncertainty, the signal to the
ρ(x) parameters from the Lp objective is much noisier than it is for the ordering function, which makes it
more challenging to infer smooth representations of the noise. Intuitively, this seems to be because from
the perspective of the deterministic/stochastic tradeoff, what is most important is the gradient of the order,
∇l(x), which shows up explicitly in the expansion of ODK, and the gradient of the diffusion, ∇σ2(x), which
does not; thus, the stochastic flux of probability is more obscured than the deterministic flow of the process.
In addition, the diffusion will also be more heavily dependent on the observed sampling density of the
data, qempirical(x), discrepancies between the observed sampling distribution and the process’s true transient
distribution will then surely manifest in the estimates of the diffusion. We can observe this more noisy
signal by running the proposed Lp optimisation without any smoothness regularisation on the ordering or
noise function: when we do this, the order estimate is still relatively smooth, although more noisy and less
accurate than the results given in figure 7, while the estimated ρ’s appear highly noisy with some pointwise
estimates showing very anomalous behaviour. This shows that for some points (particularly points near the
33


boundary) there is very little signal from the objective, and variations in the sampling density can distort
estimates, leading to noisy results. In addition, if we run the optimisation only for ρ(x) while fixing the
order to be equal to the ground truth, we again observe a noisy estimate but we notice that if we - quite
heavily (k ≈100) - smooth this estimate with a Gaussian kernel, i.e. we compute ¯ρk(x) where for a function
f(x) the smoothed estimate is defined as:
¯fk(xi) = 1
Zi
m
X
j=1
exp

−∥xi −xj∥2
2∥xi −xk
i ∥2

f(xj),
where:
Zi =
m
X
j=1
exp

−∥xi −xj∥2
2∥xi −xk
i ∥2

,
(108)
and xk
i is the kth nearest neighbour to xi in D (not including xi itself). Then we see that ¯ρk(x) is very close to
the true noise function (indeed, using k = 90 the results look very similar to Panel E of figure 7), which shows
that, conditional on the order the true signal of the noise does exist in the data and can be extracted through
the Lp objective. Thus, we conclude that when optimising for the order and noise function simultaneously,
applying proper smoothness regularisation is important to ensure that variations in the sampling density do
not obscure the true signal of the noise in the data and to regularise the loss landscape of the objective so
that locally undecidable tradeoffs between deterministic and stochastic dynamics do not skew the estimated
order or diffusion. We propose two methods for introducing a smoothness regularisation and discuss each
separately in the next two subsections; the results of applying both methods are shown in figure 7.
Regularisation Functions
The first method of smoothness regularisation follows from the regularisation
we performed in the OU example; we consider adding a gradient regularisation term for the ordering function
(i.e. Rgrad(ˆl) as given in equation (102)) and a Laplacian regularisation term to the noise function (i.e. Rlap(ˆρ)
as given in equation (103)), to the Lp-objective. We weight the hyperparameters of each term to account for
the relative differences in scale between the ground truth order and noise; more precisely, we let λl
reg/λρ
reg ≈
Ex∼q[ρ(x)]2/Ex∼q[l(x)]2 where we take the square of each function because both the gradient and Laplacian
regularisation functions scale multiplicitively as Rgrad(c · f) = c2Rgrad(f) and Rlap(c · f) = c2Rlap(f).
We choose the overall scale by doing a small grid search while constraining the relative strength of both
regularisation terms to be small relative to the total objective: ultimately we end up with λl
reg = 0.03 and
λρ
reg = 12.5, which amounts to approximately 3.000% of the total objective coming from these regularisation
terms (when evaluated at the ground truth values). It is desirable that the regularisation is only a small
proportion of the total objective, as we don’t want to overly influence the functional form of either the
ordering or the noise.
We show the results of running this optimisation in panels A and D of figure 7.
We see very little
discernable difference between the ground truth order and estimated order (panel A of figure 6 and panel
A of figure 7) with average value of the ground truth order being Ex∼q[lgt(x)] ≈13.05 and the estimated
average value being Ex∼q[lreg
est (x)] ≈13.84, the relative difference of the estimate averaged over the data is
6.1% and shows the scale has been appropriately estimated, and has done so in a uniformly accurate manner
across the data. The L2-norm between the ground truth and the estimated order is ∥lgt(x)−lreg
est ∥L2 ≈0.961,
which gives a relative difference (∥lgt(x) −lreg
est ∥L2/∥lgt∥L2) of approximately 6.67%, which again shows the
estimates are reasonably accurate across the whole dataset.
In panel C, we plot the estimated orders against the ground truth order, and we observe a high degree
of collinearity between the two (where the red dashed line shows the line y = x); this is quantified by
a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.999 between the estimated and ground truth orders.
From panel
C, we can also notice that the order is slightly overestimated, indicating a slight preference for moving
probability deterministically (a steeper gradient). Overall, this shows that the first optimisation accurately
reconstructs the first-order dynamics of the NL process. In panel D, we visualise the estimated ρreg
est(x) given
this regularised optimisation and observe that the rough sense of the diffusion has been captured (that being
a maxima near the initial condition x0 = (0, 0)T that then decays along the four different branches of the
data); however, we note that the ground truth order flicks up once ∥x∥> 2π, which can be seen in the red
line of panel F. The ρreg
est(x) estimate coming from the regularised optimisation does not seem to capture
this, which can be seen in the solid orange line of Panel F.
We also note that between lgt = 5 and lgt = 17.5 the estimated noise is overestimated, which aligns with
our expectations given that the order was slightly overestimated in this region (overestimating the diffusion
means the effective drift due to stochasticity is less; overestimating the order then compensates for this). In
34


Figure 7: In this figure we visualise the optimal ordering and noise found by minimising two runs of the Lp objective
(equation (106)) with different smoothness regularisations, applied to 2,500 data points sampled from the NL process
(equation (104)) with r = Unif([0, 4]) and from x0 = (0, 0)T ; the ground truth for both is visualised in figure 6. In
Panel A & Panel D, we show the estimated order and noise functions, respectively, from a run of the Lp objective
with gradient smoothness regularisation (GR, equation (102), λl
reg = 0.03) applied to l(x), and Laplacian smoothness
regularisation (LR, equation (103), λρ
reg = 12.5) applied to ρ(x). In Panel B and Panel E, we show the estimated
order and smoothed (Gaussian smoothing with k = 35 in equation (108)) noise functions, respectively, for a run
of the Lp objective, with each function being a weighted sum of the top k = 250 eigenfunctions of the symmetric
transition matrix P sym
ε
with ε = 0.1 (LE; see main text of section 4.3.2, and Appendix B.6) as in equation (109).
Panel C plots the estimates in panel A (orange dots) & panel B (green dots) against the ground truth order; each
estimate is highly correlated with y = x (dashed red line), both having a Pearson correlation of approximately 0.999
with the ground truth order. However, we also observe that both runs slightly overestimate the order. Panel F
plots the ground truth noise of panel B in figure 6 (red dots), the estimated noise of panel D (orange dots) & the
smoothed estimated noise of panel E (green dots), against the ground truth noise; the solid red, orange and green
lines are degree-6 Polynomials of Best Fit (POBF) to the scatter plot of each respective colour. We again observe
that both the (GR+LR) run and the LE run capture the rough shape of the true noise. However, the (GR+LR)
noise overestimates the noise while travelling along any of the four branches of the NL process and fails to resolve
the uptick in the diffusion past ∥x∥2 = 2π; while the LE noise, even after applying additional smoothing, is still more
noisy than the regularised estimate, however, the fit of the LE estimate is far more aligned with the groundtruth,
seemingly not overestimating the noise along the branches and resolving the uptick past ∥x∥2 = 2π.
35


spite of this, the relative difference of the scale of the estimated and ground truth ρ(x) stands at 4.48%, the
L2-norm between the estimate and true values equals ∥ρgt −ρreg
est∥L2 ≈0.0888, with an average L2-difference
of 13.0%, and Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.903 to the ground truth.
Laplacian Eigenbasis
The second method of smoothness regularisation takes inspiration from Diffusion
Maps [21], and works by replacing the pointwise estimate of l(x) and ρ(x) with:
ˆl(x) =
K
X
k=2
αl
kφk(x),
and:
ˆρ(x) = exp
 K
X
k=1
αρ
kφk(x)
!
,
(109)
where φk satisfies Lsym
ε
φk = λkφk, and K > 1 is the number of basis functions we use and we choose
the eigenfunctions to be those with the K largest eigenvalues.16 We know that φ1(x) ∝1(x) is the trivial
constant eigenfunction, and since shifting the ordering function by a constant does not change the dynamics
of our ODK (∇(ˆl(x) + C) = ∇ˆl(x)), thus we omit φ1 from the eigenspace of the ordering function. We
exponentiate the weighted sum for ˆρ to enforce strict positivity.
In the example given in figure 7, we use K = 250, which, in theory, would be enough to represent almost
any smooth function that can reasonably be defined on D that we might be interested in. In practice, the
discrete eigenvectors we approximate only approximate the eigenfunctions of the Laplacian, and they do
so well, but when we start considering higher frequency eigenfunctions (smaller eigenvalues/larger K), the
discrete eigenvectors depend increasingly more on the specific sampling of the data, i.e. D, that one has —
eventually the eigenfunctions will become almost δ-like. Thus, there is a trade-off when choosing K: too
small, and the true function will not be contained in your eigenspace; too large, and you are effectively not
enforcing any smoothness regularisation at all. We see by projecting the true noise onto these eigenfunctions
that ≈99% can be explained by the top 20 eigenfunctions (and even ≈90% by the top 10), we also see that
the magnitude of the basis weightings are almost negligible after K > 100. Using more eigenfunctions than
necessary could result in higher-frequency oscillations that make our estimates noisier, but also expand the
function space, making it easier for the optimiser to navigate. The value K = 250 was chosen after a grid
search and is likely too large to enforce smoothness as effectively as we would like.
We show the estimated ordering function and smoothed estimated noise function after running this
optimisation in panels B & E of figure 7, respectively. In Panel B, we observe very little discernable difference
between the ground truth order (shown in panel A of figure 6), with Ex∼q[lest(x)] ≈13.8 (an overestimation
of 5.5%), and with the L2 difference being ∥lgt(x) −lest(x)∥L2 = 0.897 which works out to a 5.88% relative
error when averaged across the data.
In Panel C, we again plot the order estimate (green dots) against the ground truth and observe much
the same as with the previous estimate (Pearson correlation coefficient ≈0.999); both the regularised and
Laplacian Eigenbasis optimisations yield very similar optimal orders, with maybe a slight edge to the LE
estimate as it seems not to overestimate the true order as much as the GR+LR estimate. In Panel E, we plot
a smoothed estimate of the noise, where we have applied a Gaussian smoothing with k = 35 as in equation
(108);17 although the smoothed estimate is still highly aligned with the ground truth, we can clearly see
that even after applying this additional smoothing procedure, the estimates are still more noisy than those
in Panel D. This indicates to us that the LE smoothness regularisation is not strong enough a constraint
to enforce smoothness in our estimates; this is likely due to K being too large and thus includes too many
high-frequency sharp eigenfunctions eigenfunctions. The plot in Panel F provides a clearer picture of the
differences between the two estimates: it is immediately clear from looking at the spread of the orange dots
(GR+LR noise estimate) compared to the spread of the green dots (LE estimate) that, even after additional
smoothing, the LE estimate is still much more noisy than the GR+LR estimate; however, the GR+LR
estimate overestimates the diffusion in the central portion of the ordering values, whereas the LE estimates
seem to cluster around the true values (red dots). The solid red, orange and green lines show Polynomials
16In practice, since ⟨φi, φj⟩L2(M,q) = δij are only orthonormal with respect to the sampling measure q, they will not be
orthonormal in the standard Euclidean L2 sense, so we orthonormalise our eigenfunctions using the Gram-Schmidt process [58].
See appendix B.6 for more details.
17We choose k = 35 somewhat arbitrarily, using some heuristics for k < 30 there still appeared to be some noise, and for
k > 40 there was very little marked difference in the estimates before oversmoothing took over. Due to an inability to decide
between k = 30 and k = 40, we used k = 35.
36


of Best Fit (POBF) of degree-6 that fit a smooth curve to the scatters of the corresponding colours; from
this we see that the LE noise estimate really does cluster around the true noise values, even resolving the
upwards flick of the diffusion after ∥x∥2 > 2π — which we recall the GR+LR estimate does not resolve.
Quantitatively, the smoothed estimates differ in scale from the true values by 4.65%, have an absolute L2-
difference of approximately 0.0811, which is equivalent to an 11.9% relative difference; finally, the Pearson
correlation coefficient between the estimate and the ground truth stands at 0.921.
To probe why the estimates of the noise function differ between the (GR+LR) and LE runs of the
Lp objective optimisation scheme, we assessed whether the estimated noise from the regularised run, lay
within the eigenspace of the LE run: we found that over 99.9% of ρreg
est(x) could be explained by our chosen
eigenbasis, thus it is a feature of the choice of regularisation that causes the specific shape observed in the
graph of ρreg
est(x) as seen in Panel D and F of figure 7. But as we noted, the total regularisation for both the
order and the noise accounts for only about 3% of the total objective’s magnitude. This indicates that the
Lp objective around the true ρgt(x), is very flat and cannot easily distinguish between different functional
forms; adding the LR regularisation clearly creates a local minimum around the observed optimal ρreg
est(x) in
the (GR+LR) run. However, the fact that when we replace the Laplacian regularisation with an eigenbasis
decomposition, which doesn’t change the objective and merely restricts the parameter space, we get an
estimate which clusters strongly around the true values of ρgt(x) indicates to us that the signal of the true
noise is present in the dataset, but that this signal is so weak that it cannot easily be distinguished from
other nearby functions in parameter space. We could potentially ameliorate these effects by the addition of
a more principled regularisation; for example, we could consider adding a regularisation term of the form
R(Φ) =
1
m
Pm
i=1
τ(xi)2
ρ(xi)2 which is the drift part of the Onsager-Machlup action [66] averaged over the data;
in theory, minimising this action will minimise the relative entropy between the inferred path law from a
driftless reference law.
The potential unidentifiability of our optimisation problem reduces to how the model balances drift and
diffusion, so an objective that depends directly on such a quantity might help amplify the noise signal relative
to the drift; furthermore, minimising the Girsanov action is equivalent to maximising the path entropy, thus,
in theory, the optimal parameters will assume the least structure beyond what is required by the data. In
this paper we will not explore other possibilities for setting up this optimisation problem, but we note that
this is highly relevant and interesting future work. Assuming the KL-divergence is a good choice of measure
for this problem, the Lp objective being flat around ρgt(x) might be empirical evidence that this optimisation
problem is theoretically unidentifiable and the fact that either the (GR+LR) or LE run give results that
align with the ground truth is the result of some other artifact in the data, that need not be present for all
processes or in all samples.
What we have shown with this final example is that both formulations of the optimisation problem given
by the Lp objective are capable of accurately reconstructing the dynamics of the NL process given in (104).
Both formulations reconstruct a smooth order that is highly correlated with the true ordering, indicating that
we can truly resolve the first-order dynamics in the presence of spatially varying noise arising from a complex
non-linear SDE. The noise estimate from the regularised (GR+LR) optimisation is clearly a smooth function,
as desired, and captures the form of the true noise function accurately (maximal initially, and then decays
the further from the centre one goes); although, it overestimates the diffusion (underestimates the diffusion
gradient) in the central portion of the dynamics and fails to resolve the uptick in diffusion beyond ∥x∥2 > 2π.
In contrast, the estimated noise from the LE optimisation is highly clustered around the true noise function
through the entire range of the process and, furthermore, is capable of resolving the uptick in diffusion
beyond ∥x∥2 > 2π. However, the LE noise estimate is highly noisy, likely due both to choosing K = 250,
which is much larger than needed, and to the signal from the noise in the data being very weak, making
it difficult to identify a single smooth function within the eigenspace. Both the Lq and Lp objectives are
first attempts to build an optimisation framework that leverages the rigid structure and interpretable design
of ODKs to learn unknown first- and second-order dynamics from data generated by a Markov stochastic
process and which comes with very little a priori dynamical information.
37


5
Conclusion
In this paper, we have introduced Ordered Diffusion Kernels (ODKs) as a novel class of local kernels for
computing transition probabilities and the infinitesimal generator for an arbitrary Itˆo SDE. We assume that
we have data sampled from a dynamical system not in steady state and with known initial conditions; we
do not require any additional dynamical information, such as known rates of evolution, a mechanistic model
for the underlying process, exact sampling times, or a known time-sampling distribution. As a prototypical
example of such data, we use single-cell RNA sequencing data (scRNA-seq), which captures a gene expression
landscape of a cell population and which we assume is not in steady state, i.e.
a stem cell undergoing
differentiation. Representing or learning dynamics on this data is thus a highly underdetermined problem
and is often approached by building hugely expressive inference machines to overwhelm the task; these often
rely on deep neural networks or complex probabilistic models. The issues with such models are that, due to
the lack of dynamic constraints, one cannot be sure that massively over-parameterised methods have learnt
coherent dynamics that faithfully correlate with the true underlying dynamics. We designed ODKs as a
simple alternative to these methods, the expansion of the normalised integral operator of Theorem 3.1 tells
us exactly what underlying process we are approximating, that being the Itˆo SDE with infinitesimal generator
L = τ
κ∇l · ∇+ D∆, and the restriction to sample-to-sample transitions constrains the model to not learn
unjustifiable out of distribution dynamics. We took great care in making sure ODKs were as interpretable and
modular as possible, allowing practitioners a great deal of freedom to tune the parameters or tailor the ODK
to the specific data they are studying. We emphasised this modularity through the various extensions of ODK
that we discussed: we constructed local-Ordered Diffusion Kernels (lODKs) to represent non-gradient flow
dynamics (section 3.1); multi-Ordered Diffusion Kernels (mODKs) are compatible with multiple ordering
functions (section 3.1.1; anisotropic-Ordered Diffusion Kernels (anODKs) allow for anisotropic diffusions
(section 3.2; and self-tuning-Ordered Diffusion Kernels (stODKs) allow for symmetric bandwidths of the
form ρ(x)ρ(y) (section 3.2.1).
For this latter extension, we also strengthened the asymptotic results of
Variable Bandwidth Kernels [10] from weak to strong convergence. Fundamentally, all these extensions rely
on what we call an ordering function, which we conceptualise as a relaxed form of a potential in which
only the implied directionality is important, i.e. ODKs will bias transitions towards higher-order samples.
Since we assume the initial conditions are known — which for the example of scRNA-seq would be some a
priori knowledge of the gene expression of stem cells — we can always construct an ordering as the geodesic
distance — on an undirected connected neighbourhood graph of the data — of any sample from these initial
conditions; so in the abscence of any dynamical information we can still use ODKs to represent dynamics
that will correlate with the underlying dynamics that generated the data. In section 4.3, we leveraged the
rigid structure of these dynamic representations to build two loss functions, namely the Lq and Lp objectives,
which we can fit into a simple gradient descent optimisation scheme to learn the drift and diffusion parameters
of data sampled on an SDE. We demonstrated on data sampled from an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck and Non-Linear
SDEs that we were capable of learning the true underlying drift and diffusion of the underlying process, even
when the diffusion was state-dependent.
Our results follow on from a considerable body of work that formalises the intuition that (un)weighted
graph Laplacians produce representations that are coherent with the geometry of the underlying manifold.
Most directly relevant to our work is TMDmap by Banisch et al. [2], who leveraged ideas from the α-density
regularised Diffusion Maps kernels [21] to aim the transitions towards any target measure; however, this
creates an inextricable coupling between the first- and second-order terms of the Laplacian. The structure of
ODKs allows us to avoid this coupling, allowing us the freedom to set the drift and diffusion independently of
one another. Also relevant is the work of Berry & Sauer in their paper on Local Kernels [11]; here the most
general formulation of the asymptotic convergence of (localised) kernels is provided, and is a result we use
repeatedly in the proofs given in Appendix A. However, the framing of local kernels was from the perspective
of vector fields, which requires abundant dynamical information to infer with confidence. To summarise, when
working with data generated by a dynamical system and in which little dynamical information is available,
we believe the reformulation of the unknown dynamics in terms of an ordering function is both a substantial
relaxation of the initial inference problem, while still being sufficient to represent the underlying dynamics.
ODKs are then a practical reformulation of Local Kernels within this framework, giving practitioners a tool
to convert a minimal representation of the dynamics into a practical tool for further analysis, or a dynamic
representation from which to formulate an inference problem. The well-understood limiting behaviour of
38


ODKs then gives users confidence in the fidelity of this representation and clarity about how each component
input to the ODK is resolved in the data.
Limitations:
The choice of an optimal parameterisation for kernel methods is historically a very challeng-
ing task since one needs to balance a choice of parameterisation where the kernel is most useful for further
analysis, and one must ensure that the kernel is fitting the specific sample of the data that one has. Our
conceptualisation of ODKs as forming a representation of the underlying dynamics that generated the data
constrains the notion of what good looks like, but for data that is very sparse or inhomogeneously sampled,
it is not clear that the best representation of the dynamics would be possible given a specific sampling of
the data. Thus, for data of this sort, the intrinsic sensitivity of kernel methods to the sampling of the data
cannot be ignored, and must be dealt with carefully. One of the strongest traits of kernel methods is their
non-dependence on the dimensionality of the data, since the only step in the evaluation of a kernel that
depends on the dimension is the initial computation of a pairwise distance matrix, this is the essence behind
calling the evaluation of a kernel a representation of the data; however, what is often left unsaid is how ker-
nels are affected if the distance metric itself is unreliable. Particularly, for data that is embedded in Rn with
n ≫100, the Euclidean metric is known to struggle in distinguishing distances; particularly, the concentra-
tion of measure phenomena [56] shows that as n →∞, the distance to the nearest and furthest samples in a
bounded domain will tend to the same value, i.e. the ability for the Euclidean metric to discriminate between
distances collapses as the dimension increases — this is particularly relevant to scRNA-seq data in which
one is considering the RNA counts associated to many thousands of genes. In such situations, one should
also take care to ensure that the chosen distance metric is informative enough for the kernel to resolve the
data as desired. We also note that anisotropic diffusions do not fit naturally within the framework of ODKs
as they do with local kernels; this can be seen in the expansion of Theorem 3.4 where the drift is coupled to
the anisotropic diffusion tensor, much like the drift is coupled to the diffusion in TMDmaps. We mollified
this coupling by proposing to use the Strang Splitting scheme to compose a drifted ODK with isotropic
diffusion and a symmetric anisotropic local kernel; this has the effect of removing this coupling but adds a
free parameter α ∈(0, 1) that one must choose when deciding how to split the diffusion between the two
operators. The choice of α is not arbitrary since if it is made too small or too large one of the two kernels
will fail to resolve on a the data; furthermore, if your number of samples is large, m ≫104, computing
the product of three dense matrices of this size will take a not insignificant amount of time, and thus may
preclude the use of such a scheme in an iterative framework such as gradient descent in the optimisation
schemes of section 4.3.
Future Directions:
The most obvious future direction is to apply ODKs to the motivating example
of scRNA-seq data.
The abundance of so-called PseudoTime methods in the scRNA-seq literature [89,
40, 62] makes the idea of an ordering function almost canonical within the field and allows us to jump
straight into exploratory analysis of the dynamics. Due to the limited dynamical information available, high
dimensionality, and inhomogeneous data sampling, this will be a challenging test for ODK; its success or
failure will, more generally, indicate where the limits of this and similar kernel methods lie. However, we note
that the method of Diffusion PseudoTime [40] leverages the work of Coifman & Lafon [21] to construct a
diffusion distance on scRNA-seq data constructed through a symmetric bandwidth diffusion kernel [10]; this
method is considered one of the most reliable and state-of-the-art methods from the PseudoTime literature,
thus giving us cause to believe that ODKs can be applied to scRNA-seq data effectively. Of particular interest
is the application of the Lq or Lp objective introduced in section 4.3; this may allow us to simultaneously infer
the potential and the state-dependent diffusion that underlie differentiation. Allowing for state-dependent
diffusion would already be a significant advancement in the field, since diffusion is almost always assumed to
be constant in the literature. In this paper, we do not prove that either the Lq or Lp objective is identifiable
from our assumed observations; providing such a result, or understanding why it is not possible, would give
much-needed context for the sort of scientific statements one can make after running these optimisations
(see related work of Lavenant et al. [55]). Furthermore, we formulated these objectives as simple maximum-
likelihoods; it is possible, and indeed probable, that different and better formulations exist that can leverage
ODKs’ representations of the dynamics to greater effect and potentially improve our chances of identifiability.
39


Acknowledgements
J.H. Soulsby was supported by the EPSRC CASE scholarship in partnership with Pasqal SAS.
References
[1] Michele Allegra, Elena Facco, Francesco Denti, Alessandro Laio, and Antonietta Mira.
Data seg-
mentation based on the local intrinsic dimension.
Scientific Reports, 10(1), October 2020.
URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-72222-0, doi:10.1038/s41598-020-72222-0.
[2] Ralf Banisch, Zofia Trstanova, Andreas Bittracher, Stefan Klus, and P´eter Koltai. Diffusion maps
tailored to arbitrary non-degenerate itˆo processes. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis,
48(1):242—-265, January 2020. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2018.05.001, doi:10.
1016/j.acha.2018.05.001.
[3] Mikhail Belkin. Problems of learning on manifolds. PhD thesis, The University of Chicago, 2003.
AAI3097083.
[4] Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Laplacian eigenmaps for dimensionality reduction and data repre-
sentation. Neural Computation, 15(6):1373—-1396, June 2003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
089976603321780317, doi:10.1162/089976603321780317.
[5] Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Convergence of laplacian eigenmaps. In B. Sch¨olkopf, J. Platt, and
T. Hoffman, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 19, pages 129––136.
The MIT Press, September 2007.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/7503.003.0021,
doi:10.7551/mitpress/7503.003.0021.
[6] Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi.
Towards a theoretical foundation for laplacian-based manifold
methods. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(8):1289––1308, December 2008. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcss.2007.08.006, doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2007.08.006.
[7] Mikhail Belkin, Qichao Que, Yusu Wang, and Xueyuan Zhou. Toward understanding complex spaces:
Graph laplacians on manifolds with singularities and boundaries. In Shie Mannor, Nathan Srebro,
and Robert C. Williamson, editors, Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference on Learning Theory,
volume 23 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 36.1–36.26. PMLR, June 2012. URL:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v23/belkin12.html.
[8] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new perspectives.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8):1798—-1828, August 2013.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/tpami.2013.50, doi:10.1109/tpami.2013.50.
[9] Volker Bergen, Marius Lange, Stefan Peidli, F. Alexander Wolf, and Fabian J. Theis.
Gener-
alizing rna velocity to transient cell states through dynamical modeling.
Nature Biotechnology,
38(12):1408—-1414, August 2020.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41587-020-0591-3, doi:
10.1038/s41587-020-0591-3.
[10] Tyrus Berry and John Harlim.
Variable bandwidth diffusion kernels.
Applied and Computational
Harmonic Analysis, 40(1):68––96, January 2016. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2015.
01.001, doi:10.1016/j.acha.2015.01.001.
[11] Tyrus Berry and Timothy Sauer. Local kernels and the geometric structure of data. Applied and
Computational Harmonic Analysis, 40(3):439–469, May 2016. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.acha.2015.03.002, doi:10.1016/j.acha.2015.03.002.
[12] Tyrus Berry and Timothy Sauer. Density estimation on manifolds with boundary. Computational
Statistics & Data Analysis, 107:1—-17, March 2017. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.
2016.09.011, doi:10.1016/j.csda.2016.09.011.
40


[13] Tyrus Berry and Timothy Sauer. Consistent manifold representation for topological data analysis.
Foundations of Data Science, 1(1):1—-38, 2019. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3934/fods.2019001,
doi:10.3934/fods.2019001.
[14] R.B. Bird, W.E. Stewart, E.N. Lightfoot, and D.J. Klingenberg. Introductory Transport Phenomena.
Wiley, 2015. URL: https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=wwXYBgAAQBAJ.
[15] Vladimir
Bogachev,
Nicolai
Krylov,
Michael
R¨ockner,
and
Stanislav
Shaposhnikov.
Fokker–Planck–Kolmogorov Equations.
American Mathematical Society, December 2015.
URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/surv/207, doi:10.1090/surv/207.
[16] Gianni Bosi and Gerhard Herden.
Continuous multi-utility representations of preorders.
Journal
of Mathematical Economics, 48(4):212––218, August 2012. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmateco.2012.05.001, doi:10.1016/j.jmateco.2012.05.001.
[17] Gunnar Carlsson. Topology and data. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 46(2):255–
–308, January 2009. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/s0273-0979-09-01249-x, doi:10.1090/
s0273-0979-09-01249-x.
[18] Bang-Yen Chen.
Pseudo-Riemannian Geometry, δ-Invariants and Applications.
WORLD SCIEN-
TIFIC, March 2011. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/8003, doi:10.1142/8003.
[19] L´ena¨ıc Chizat, Stephen Zhang, Matthieu Heitz, and Geoffrey Schiebinger. Trajectory inference via
mean-field langevin in path space. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, NeurIPS
2022, pages 16731—-16742. Neural Information Processing Systems Foundation, Inc. (NeurIPS), 2022.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.52202/068431-1217, doi:10.52202/068431-1217.
[20] F. R. K Chung.
Spectral graph theory, volume 92.
American Mathematical Society, 1997.
doi:
10.1090/cbms/092.
[21] Ronald R. Coifman and St´ephane Lafon.
Diffusion maps.
Applied and Computational Harmonic
Analysis, 21(1):5–30, July 2006. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2006.04.006, doi:10.
1016/j.acha.2006.04.006.
[22] Romain Couillet and Florent Benaych-Georges.
Kernel spectral clustering of large dimensional
data.
Electronic Journal of Statistics, 10(1), January 2016.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/
16-ejs1144, doi:10.1214/16-ejs1144.
[23] Michel Cristofol and Lionel Roques. Simultaneous determination of the drift and diffusion coefficients
in stochastic differential equations. Inverse Problems, 33(9):095006, August 2017. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1088/1361-6420/aa7a1c, doi:10.1088/1361-6420/aa7a1c.
[24] Gerard Debreu. Representation of a preference ordering by a numerical function, chapter 6, pages 105–
–110. Cambridge University Press, 1983. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/ccol052123736x.007,
doi:10.1017/ccol052123736x.007.
[25] Inderjit S. Dhillon, Yuqiang Guan, and Brian Kulis. Kernel k-means: spectral clustering and normalized
cuts. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining, KDD04, pages 551––556. ACM, August 2004.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/
1014052.1014118, doi:10.1145/1014052.1014118.
[26] Antonio Di Noia, Iuri Macocco, Aldo Glielmo, Alessandro Laio, and Antonietta Mira. Scale adap-
tive and robust intrinsic dimension estimation via optimal neighbourhood identification.
Scien-
tific Reports, 16(1), April 2026.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-026-48005-4, doi:
10.1038/s41598-026-48005-4.
[27] E. W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numerische Mathematik, 1(1):269—
-271, December 1959. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/bf01386390, doi:10.1007/bf01386390.
41


[28] Edelsbrunner, Letscher, and Zomorodian.
Topological persistence and simplification.
Discrete &
Computational Geometry, 28(4):511––533, November 2002.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00454-002-2885-2, doi:10.1007/s00454-002-2885-2.
[29] K. D. Elworthy. Stochastic Differential Equations on Manifolds, volume 128 of Lecture Notes in Statis-
tics, pages 165–178. Springer New York, New York, NY, 1998. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-2224-8_10.
[30] Lawrence Evans. Partial Differential Equations. American Mathematical Society, March 2010. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/gsm/019, doi:10.1090/gsm/019.
[31] ¨Ozg¨ur Evren and Efe A. Ok.
On the multi-utility representation of preference relations.
Journal
of Mathematical Economics, 47(4-5):554––563, August 2011. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmateco.2011.07.003, doi:10.1016/j.jmateco.2011.07.003.
[32] Elena Facco, Maria d’Errico, Alex Rodriguez, and Alessandro Laio. Estimating the intrinsic dimension
of datasets by a minimal neighborhood information. Scientific Reports, 7(1), September 2017. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-11873-y, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-11873-y.
[33] Lisbeth Fajstrup, Martin Raußen, and Eric Goubault. Algebraic topology and concurrency. The-
oretical Computer Science, 357(1):241–278, 2006. Clifford Lectures and the Mathematical Founda-
tions of Programming Semantics. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S030439750600274X, doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2006.03.022.
[34] Charles Fefferman, Sanjoy Mitter, and Hariharan Narayanan. Testing the manifold hypothesis. Journal
of the American Mathematical Society, 29(4):983––1049, February 2016. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1090/jams/852, doi:10.1090/jams/852.
[35] Robert W. Floyd. Algorithm 97: Shortest path. Communications of the ACM, 5(6):345––345, June
1962. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/367766.368168, doi:10.1145/367766.368168.
[36] Evarist Gin´e and Vladimir Koltchinskii. Empirical graph laplacian approximation of laplace–beltrami
operators: Large sample results. Lecture Notes-Monograph Series, 51:238––259, 2006. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1214/074921706000000888, doi:10.1214/074921706000000888.
[37] Daniele Granata and Vincenzo Carnevale. Accurate estimation of the intrinsic dimension using graph
distances: Unraveling the geometric complexity of datasets. Scientific Reports, 6(1), August 2016.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep31377, doi:10.1038/srep31377.
[38] Marco Grandis. Directed Algebraic Topology: Models of Non-Reversible Worlds. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, September 2009. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511657474, doi:10.1017/
cbo9780511657474.
[39] Vincent Guan, Joseph Janssen, Nicolas Lanzetti, Antonio Terpin, Geoffrey Schiebinger, and Elina
Robeva. Gradient-flow SDEs have unique transient population dynamics. In The 29th International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.21770,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2505.21770.
[40] Laleh Haghverdi, Maren B¨uttner, F Alexander Wolf, Florian Buettner, and Fabian J Theis. Diffusion
pseudotime robustly reconstructs lineage branching. Nature Methods, 13:845–848, 2016. doi:10.1038/
nmeth.3971.
[41] Ernst Hairer, Gerhard Wanner, and Christian Lubich. Geometric Numerical Integration: Structure-
Preserving Algorithms for Ordinary Differential Equations.
Springer Series in Computational
Mathematics. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2 edition, 2006.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
3-540-30666-8, doi:10.1007/3-540-30666-8.
[42] Tatsunori Hashimoto, David Gifford, and Tommi Jaakkola. Learning population-level diffusions with
generative rnns.
In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Proceedings of The
33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
42


Research, pages 2417–2426, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR.
URL: https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v48/hashimoto16.html.
[43] Emmanuel Haucourt. Streams, d-spaces and their fundamental categories. Electronic Notes in The-
oretical Computer Science, 283:111—-151, June 2012. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.
2012.05.008, doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2012.05.008.
[44] Matthias Hein and Jean-Yves Audibert. Intrinsic dimensionality estimation of submanifolds in Rd.
In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Machine Learning - ICML ’05, ICML ’05,
pages 289—-296. ACM Press, 2005.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1102351.1102388, doi:
10.1145/1102351.1102388.
[45] Matthias Hein, Jean-Yves Audibert, and Ulrike von Luxburg. Graph laplacians and their convergence
on random neighborhood graphs. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8:1325—-1370, December
2007.
[46] Hideitsu Hino. ider: Intrinsic dimension estimation with r. The R Journal, 9(2):329, 2017. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.32614/rj-2017-054, doi:10.32614/rj-2017-054.
[47] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks.
Science, 313(5786):504—-507, July 2006.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1127647,
doi:10.1126/science.1127647.
[48] Martin Hoffmann, Hannah H. Chang, Sui Huang, Donald E. Ingber, Markus Loeffler, and Joerg Galle.
Noise-driven stem cell and progenitor population dynamics. PLoS ONE, 3(8):e2922, August 2008. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0002922, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002922.
[49] Masato Inagaki. Spectral convergence of graph laplacians with ricci curvature bounds and in non-
collapsed ricci limit spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07427, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/
2506.07427, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2506.07427.
[50] Suoqin Jin, Adam L MacLean, Tao Peng, and Qing Nie. scepath: energy landscape-based inference of
transition probabilities and cellular trajectories from single-cell transcriptomic data. Bioinformatics,
34(12):2077—-2086, February 2018.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty058,
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty058.
[51] Steven G. Johnson. The NLopt nonlinear-optimization package. https://github.com/stevengj/
nlopt, 2007.
[52] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.
Auto-encoding variational bayes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6114, 2022.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1312.
6114.
[53] A. Kolmogoroff. ¨Uber die analytischen methoden in der wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Mathematische
Annalen, 104(1):415––458, December 1931. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/bf01457949, doi:
10.1007/bf01457949.
[54] Sanjeevi Krishnan. A convenient category of locally preordered spaces. Applied Categorical Structures,
17(5):445—-466, June 2008. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10485-008-9140-9, doi:10.1007/
s10485-008-9140-9.
[55] Hugo Lavenant, Stephen Zhang, Young-Heon Kim, and Geoffrey Schiebinger. Toward a mathematical
theory of trajectory inference.
The Annals of Applied Probability, 34(1A), February 2024.
URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/23-aap1969, doi:10.1214/23-aap1969.
[56] Michel Ledoux.
The concentration of measure phenomenon.
Number 89. American Mathematical
Society, 2001. doi:10.1090/surv/089.
[57] E. L. Lehmann. Theory of Point Estimation. Springer US, 1991. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4615-8071-3, doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-8071-3.
43


[58] Steven J. Leon, ˚Ake Bj¨orck, and Walter Gander. Gram-schmidt orthogonalization: 100 years and
more. Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications, 20(3):492—-532, June 2012. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/nla.1839, doi:10.1002/nla.1839.
[59] Dong C. Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization.
Mathematical Programming, 45(1-3):503––528, August 1989.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
bf01589116, doi:10.1007/bf01589116.
[60] D. O. Loftsgaarden and C. P. Quesenberry. A nonparametric estimate of a multivariate density function.
The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 36(3):1049––1051, June 1965. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1214/aoms/1177700079, doi:10.1214/aoms/1177700079.
[61] J Lopez-Bonilla, R Lopez-Vanquez, and S Vidal-Beltran. Moore-penrose’s inverse and solutions of
linear systems. World Scientific News, 101:246–252, 2018.
[62] Malte D Luecken and Fabian J Theis. Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial.
Molecular Systems Biology, 15(6):e8746, 2019. doi:10.15252/msb.20188746.
[63] Kirill Neklyudov, Daniel Severo, and Alireza Makhzani. Action matching: A variational method for
learning stochastic dynamics from samples. In NeurIPS 2022 Workshop on Score-Based Methods, 2022.
URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=rXiZMBJBdB.
[64] Andrew Ng, Michael Jordan, and Yair Weiss. On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm. In
T. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, volume 14. MIT Press, 2001. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2001/file/801272ee79cfde7fa5960571fee36b9b-Paper.pdf.
[65] Jorge Nocedal. Updating quasi-newton matrices with limited storage. Mathematics of Computation,
35(151):773––782, 1980. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/s0025-5718-1980-0572855-7, doi:10.
1090/s0025-5718-1980-0572855-7.
[66] L. Onsager and S. Machlup. Fluctuations and irreversible processes. Physical Review, 91(6):1505––1512,
September 1953. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physrev.91.1505, doi:10.1103/physrev.91.
1505.
[67] Emanuel Parzen. On estimation of a probability density function and mode. The Annals of Math-
ematical Statistics, 33(3):1065––1076, September 1962.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/aoms/
1177704472, doi:10.1214/aoms/1177704472.
[68] Bezalel Peleg.
Utility functions for partially ordered topological spaces.
Econometrica, 38(1):93,
January 1970. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1909243, doi:10.2307/1909243.
[69] Loucas Pillaud-Vivien and Francis Bach.
Kernelized diffusion maps.
In The Thirty-Sixth Annual
Conference on Learning Theory, pages 5236–5259. PMLR, 2023.
[70] Xiaojie Qiu, Yan Zhang, Jorge D Martin-Rufino, Chen Weng, Shayan Hosseinzadeh, Dian Yang,
Angela N Pogson, Marco Y Hein, Kyung Hoi Joseph Min, Li Wang, Emanuelle I Grody, Matthew J
Shurtleff, Ruoshi Yuan, Song Xu, Yian Ma, Joseph M Replogle, Eric S Lander, Spyros Darmanis, Ivet
Bahar, Vijay G Sankaran, Jianhua Xing, and Jonathan S Weissman. Mapping transcriptomic vector
fields of single cells. Cell, 185(4):690–711, 2022. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.045.
[71] Christian P. Robert and George Casella. Monte Carlo Statistical Methods. Springer Texts in Statistics.
Springer New York, NY, 2 edition, 2004. doi:10.1007/978-1-4757-4145-2.
[72] Murray Rosenblatt. Remarks on some nonparametric estimates of a density function. The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, 27(3):832––837, September 1956. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/aoms/
1177728190, doi:10.1214/aoms/1177728190.
44


[73] Wouter Saelens,
Robrecht Cannoodt,
Helena Todorov,
and Yvan Saeys.
A comparison of
single-cell trajectory inference methods.
Nature Biotechnology, 37:547–554, 2019.
doi:10.1038/
s41587-019-0071-9.
[74] Geoffrey Schiebinger, Jian Shu, Marcin Tabaka, Brian Cleary, Vidya Subramanian, Aryeh Solomon,
Joshua Gould, Siyan Liu, Stacie Lin, Peter Berube, Lia Lee, Jenny Chen, Justin Brumbaugh, Philippe
Rigollet, Konrad Hochedlinger, Rudolf Jaenisch, Aviv Regev, and Eric S. Lander. Optimal-transport
analysis of single-cell gene expression identifies developmental trajectories in reprogramming. Cell,
176(4):928––943, February 2019.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.006, doi:
10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.006.
[75] Geoffrey Schiebinger, Martin J. Wainwright, and Bin Yu. The geometry of kernelized spectral clus-
tering. The Annals of Statistics, 43(2), April 2015. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/14-aos1283,
doi:10.1214/14-aos1283.
[76] Bernhard Sch¨olkopf, Alexander Smola, and Klaus-Robert M¨uller. Nonlinear component analysis as
a kernel eigenvalue problem. Neural Computation, 10(5):1299—-1319, July 1998. URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1162/089976698300017467, doi:10.1162/089976698300017467.
[77] David W. Scott. Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visualization. Wiley, March
2015. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118575574, doi:10.1002/9781118575574.
[78] Shan Shan and Ingrid Daubechies.
Diffusion Maps: Using the Semigroup Property for Parameter
Tuning, pages 409—-424. Springer International Publishing, December 2022. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-45847-8_18, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-45847-8_18.
[79] S. J. Sheather and M. C. Jones. A reliable data-based bandwidth selection method for kernel density
estimation. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 53(3):683—-
690, July 1991. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1991.tb01857.x, doi:10.1111/
j.2517-6161.1991.tb01857.x.
[80] Jianbo Shi and J. Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 22(8):888–905, 2000. doi:10.1109/34.868688.
[81] B.W. Silverman. Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. Routledge, February 2018.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1201/9781315140919, doi:10.1201/9781315140919.
[82] A. Singer.
From graph to manifold laplacian: The convergence rate.
Applied and Computational
Harmonic Analysis, 21(1):128––134, July 2006. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acha.2006.
03.004, doi:10.1016/j.acha.2006.03.004.
[83] Amit Singer and H-T Wu. Vector diffusion maps and the connection laplacian. Communications on
Pure and Applied Mathematics, 65(8):1067–1144, March 2012. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
cpa.21395, doi:10.1002/cpa.21395.
[84] Gilbert Strang.
On the construction and comparison of difference schemes.
SIAM Journal on
Numerical Analysis, 5(3):506––517, September 1968. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/0705041,
doi:10.1137/0705041.
[85] Kelly Street, Davide Risso, Russell B Fletcher, Diya Das, John Ngai, Nir Yosef, Elizabeth Purdom,
and Sandrine Dudoit. Slingshot: cell lineage and pseudotime inference for single-cell transcriptomics.
BMC Genomics, 19:477, 2018. doi:10.1186/s12864-018-4772-0.
[86] Minh Tang and Carey E. Priebe.
Limit theorems for eigenvectors of the normalized laplacian for
random graphs. The Annals of Statistics, 46(5), October 2018. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/
17-aos1623, doi:10.1214/17-aos1623.
[87] Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Vin de Silva, and John C. Langford. A global geometric framework for nonlinear
dimensionality reduction. Science, 290(5500):2319—-2323, December 2000. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1126/science.290.5500.2319, doi:10.1126/science.290.5500.2319.
45


[88] Daniel Ting, Ling Huang, and Michael I. Jordan. An analysis of the convergence of graph laplacians.
In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML’10, pages 1079––1086, Madison, WI, USA, 2010. Omnipress.
[89] Cole Trapnell, Davide Cacchiarelli, Jonna Grimsby, Prapti Pokharel, Shuqiang Li, Michael Morse,
Niall J Lennon, Kenneth J Livak, Tarjei S Mikkelsen, and John L Rinn. The dynamics and regulators
of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nature Biotechnology,
32:381–386, 2014. doi:10.1038/nbt.2859.
[90] H. F. Trotter.
On the product of semi-groups of operators.
Proceedings of the Ameri-
can Mathematical Society, 10(4):545—-551, August 1959.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/
s0002-9939-1959-0108732-6, doi:10.1090/s0002-9939-1959-0108732-6.
[91] J Trou´e. Topology and order by leopoldo nachbin. van nostrand mathematical studies, van nostrand
1965 (princeton). Canadian Mathematical Bulletin, 12(2):242–244, 1969.
[92] Leena C Vankadara and Debarghya Ghoshdastidar. On the optimality of kernels for high-dimensional
clustering.
In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 2185–2195.
PMLR, 2020.
[93] Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Isabelle Lajoie, Yoshua Bengio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol.
Stacked denoising autoencoders:
Learning useful representations in a deep network with a lo-
cal denoising criterion.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(110):3371–3408, 2010.
URL:
http://jmlr.org/papers/v11/vincent10a.html.
[94] Weixu Wang, Zhiyuan Hu, Philipp Weiler, Sarah Mayes, Marius Lange, David M Fountain, Jan Ole
Haug, Jingye Wang, Zhengyuan Xue, Tatjana Sauka-Spengler, and Fabian J Theis. RegVelo: gene-
regulatory-informed dynamics of single cells.
Cell, 189(12):3773–3800.e44, 2026.
doi:10.1016/j.
cell.2026.04.022.
[95] Xu Wang. Spectral convergence rate of graph laplacian. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.08110, 2015. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.08110, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1510.08110.
[96] L. E. Ward. Partially ordered topological spaces. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society,
5(1):144—-161, February 1954. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/s0002-9939-1954-0063016-5,
doi:10.1090/s0002-9939-1954-0063016-5.
[97] Stephen Warshall. A theorem on boolean matrices. Journal of the ACM, 9(1):11––12, January 1962.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/321105.321107, doi:10.1145/321105.321107.
[98] Edwin B. Wilson and Margaret M. Hilferty. The distribution of chi-square. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 17(12):684–688, 1931. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.
17.12.684, doi:10.1073/pnas.17.12.684.
[99] Lihi Zelnik-manor and Pietro Perona.
Self-tuning spectral clustering.
In L. Saul, Y. Weiss,
and
L.
Bottou,
editors,
Advances
in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems,
volume
17.
MIT Press,
2004.
URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2004/file/
40173ea48d9567f1f393b20c855bb40b-Paper.pdf.
[100] Xueyuan Zhou and Mikhail Belkin. Behavior of graph laplacians on manifolds with boundary. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1105.3931, 2011. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1105.3931, doi:10.48550/arXiv.
1105.3931.
[101] Afra Zomorodian and Gunnar Carlsson. Computing persistent homology. In Proceedings of the twenti-
eth annual symposium on Computational geometry, SoCG04, pages 347––356. ACM, June 2004. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/997817.997870, doi:10.1145/997817.997870.
46


A
Proofs of Main Results
To complete the proofs of section 3, we will use two Lemmas that we take from [21], which were initially
formulated in the PhD Thesis of Belkin [3]; however, we state them in the more convenient form that
Coifman & Lafon provide. We define and use two systems of coordinates on our manifold d-dimensional
Riemannian manifold M: the normal coordinates — constructed implicitly using the exponential map
— which we denote by (s1, . . . , sd); and the projection coordinates — constructed extrinsically using the
implicit function theorem to define a neighbourhood where we can project the embedded manifold onto a
d-dimensional affine subspace of Rn — which we denote by (u1, . . . , ud). For a much more rigorous discussion
of the construction of both of these coordinate charts, please consult appendix B.5.
The first Lemma gives an expression for the components of the normal coordinates, in terms of the
components of the projection coordinates:
Lemma A.1 (Conversion of Coordinates [21]). For any x ∈M, for sufficiently small ε and y ∈B(x, ε1/2)
(the closed ball centred as x with radius ε1/2), we can write the normal coordinate si as:
si = ui + px,3(u) + O(ε2)
(A.1)
for i = 1, . . . , d; and where px,k(u) is a homogeneous polynomial of degree k whose coefficients depend on
x.18
The second Lemma has two parts: the first gives an expression for the Euclidean distance ∥y −x∥2
in terms of projection coordinates, where we interpret this not as a geodesic distance on M but a literal
Euclidean distance in Rn, i.e. if ι : M →Rn is an embedding of our manifold into ambient space then for
two nearby points x, y ∈M, we mean ∥y −x∥= ∥ι(y) −ι(x)∥; the second, gives us a change of coordinates
formula for the volume form dy (which we simply write as dy) in terms of projection coordinates.
Lemma A.2 (Metric & Volume Comparison[21]). For any x ∈M, for sufficiently small ε and y ∈B(x, ε1/2),
we have:
i).
∥y −x∥2 = ∥u∥2 + px,4(u) + px,5(u) + O(ε3)
(A.2)
ii).
det
dy
du

= 1 + px,2(u) + px,3(u) + O(ε2)
(A.3)
If f : M →R is some scalar function defined on the manifold, then the Taylor Expansion about and
x ∈M for y in a sufficiently small ball B(x, ε1/2) around x, would read (using Einstein summation notation)
as:
f(y) = ˜f(0) + si
∂˜f
∂si
(0) + 1
2sisj
∂2 ˜f
∂si∂sj
(0) + 1
6sisjsk
∂3 ˜f
∂si∂sj∂sk
(0) + Rx,4(s)
(A.4)
where ˜f views f as a function of the normal coordinates (s1, . . . , sd) around x which means ˜f(0) = f(x);
and Rx,4(s) is the remainder term for f ∈C3(M) which we note is of order O(∥s∥4). Using A.1, we can
write this in projection coordinates as:
f(y) = f(x) + ui
∂˜f
∂si
(0) + 1
2uiuj
∂2 ˜f
∂si∂sj
(0) + px,3(u) + O(∥u∥4)
(A.5)
Using this, we prove the following Lemma, which puts the expression inside of h(·) in the definition of a
standard ODK, given in equation (5), in terms of projection coordinates:
Lemma A.3. For any x ∈M, for sufficiently small ε and y ∈B(x, ε1/2), we have:
(⋆) := ∥y −x∥2 + (l(y) −l(x) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
κ(x)2
−(l(y) −l(x))2
κ(x)2
(A.6)
= ∥u −εµ(x)∥2 + Θ4(u) + Θ5(u) + O(ε3, ε∥u∥4)
(A.7)
where µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x), and Θ4(u) and Θ5(u) are expressions of order O(ε2) and O(ε5/2), respectively.
18To be precise px,k(u) will be some polynomial of the form P
α:|α|=k cα
Qd
i=1 uαi
i , where α = (α1, . . . , αd) ∈Nd
>0 is a
multi-index and |α| = α1 + · · · + αd.
47


Proof. We note that the expression given in equation (A.6), which we now denote with (⋆), can be written
as:
(⋆) = ∥y −x∥2 −2ετ(x)
l(y) −l(x)
κ(x)

+ ε2τ(x)2
(A.8)
We can take a Taylor expansion of l(y) around x in projection coordinates to arrive at:
l(y) = l(x) + ui
∂˜l
∂ui
(0) + 1
2uiuj
∂2˜l
∂ui∂uj
+ px,3(u) + O(∥u∥4)
(A.9)
where we have used the coordinate transformation (A.1) to transform from s 7→u, and have noted that
Rx,3(s) = px,3(u) + O(∥u∥4). Now using the metric comparison equation of (A.2) we can expand:
(⋆) = ∥u∥2 + px,4(u) + px,5(u) −2ετ(x)
κ(x)
 
ui
∂˜l
∂ui
(0) + 1
2uiuj
∂2˜l
∂ui∂uj
+ px,3(u)
!
+ ε2τ(x)2 + O(ε3, ε∥u∥4)
(A.10)
= ∥u∥2 −2ετ(x)
κ(x)ui
∂˜l
∂si
(0) + ε2 τ(x)2
κ(x)2 ∥∇l(x)∥2 + Θ4(u) + Θ5(u) + O(ε3, ε∥u∥4)
(A.11)
where we have added an subtracted ε2 τ(x)2
κ(x)2 , and defined:
Θ4(u) = px,4(u) + ε2τ(x)2

1 −∥∇l(x)∥2
κ(x)2

−2ετ(x)
κ(x)uiuj
∂2˜l
∂si∂sj
(A.12)
Θ5(u) = px,5(u) −2ετ(x)
κ(x)px,3(u)
(A.13)
Continuing from (A.11) we see that:
∥u∥2 −2ετ(x)
κ(x)ui
∂˜l
∂si
(0) + ε2 τ(x)2
κ(x)2 ∥∇l(x)∥2 =

u −ετ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x), u −ετ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x)

(A.14)
and thus setting µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x) completes the proof.
With Lemma A.3 in hand, we will now complete the proof of the main result:
Theorem A.1 (Expansion of Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Suppose M is a d-dimensional Riemannian
manifold embedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the standard Euclidean metric in ambient space.
Let l ∈C2(M) be an ordering function, and let Kε(x, y) be the corresponding ODK as defined in (5).
Then for any f ∈C3(M) the associated family of backward integral operators {Gε}ε>0 admits the following
asymptotic expansion as ε →0 when applied to f:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2),
(A.15)
at a point x ∈M a distance larger than εγ from ∂M, for a fixed γ ∈(0, 1/2); and where ωl(x) depends on
the manifold and the kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and Ωl(x) depends on the manifold, the kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and
also the test function f(x). The differential operator L is a second-order elliptic operator of the form:
Lf(x) = µ(x) · ∇f(x) + D(x)∆f(x)
(A.16)
where m(x), µ(x) and D(x), satisfy:
m(x) =
Z
TxM
h

∥z∥2
ρ(x)2

dz
(A.17)
µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x)
(A.18)
D(x) = 1
2m(x)−1
Z
TxM
z2
1 h

∥z∥2
ρ(x)2

dz =: 1
2σh(x)2ρ(x)2
(A.19)
where
σh(x)2 =
1
R
TxM h(∥z∥2) d z
Z
TxM
z2
1h(∥z∥2) d z.
(A.20)
48


The normalised backward integral operator can thus be expanded in terms of ε as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLf(x) + O(ε3/2).
(A.21)
Proof of Theorem A.1. Take any γ ∈(0, 1/2), and let x ∈M be a distance of atleast εγ from the boundary
of M. Since, by assumption, an ODK is bounded by an exponential, there will exist parameters Ch, σ > 0
such that Kε(x, y) = h(−⋆) ≤Ch exp(−⋆/σ). As a result, the contribution to integral in Gεf(x) that is
outside the ball of radius εγ can be bounded as:
ε−d/2
Z
y∈M:∥y−x∥>εγ Kε(x, y)f(y) dy
 ≤ε−d/2∥f∥∞
Z
y∈M:∥y−x∥>εγ Kε(x, y) dy
(A.22)
≤ε−d/2Ch∥f∥∞
Z
y∈M:∥y−x∥>εγ exp

−∥y −x∥2
εσρ(x)2 + 2(l(y) −l(x))τ(x)
σρ(x)2κ(x)
−ετ(x)2
σρ(x)2

dy
(A.23)
≤MCh∥f∥∞
Z
∥z∥>εγ−1/2 exp

−
∥z∥2
εσρ(x)2

dy = MCh∥f∥∞Q
  d
2, cε2γ−1
(A.24)
≤MCh∥f∥∞e−cε2γ−1P(ε2γ−1) = O(ε2)
(A.25)
where M = exp(4∥l∥∞τ(x)/(σρ(x)2κ(x))), c = 1/(ρ(x)2σ), and in (A.24) we made the substitution y −x =
√εz; the function Q(s, r) is the regularised upper incomplete gamma function. In the final line, we use the
fact that when r > s −1, we have Q(s, r) ≤e−rrs[Γ(s)(r −(s −1))]−1; supposing ε <
  2c
d
1/(1−2γ) then we
can set P(ε2γ−1) = Γ
  d
2
−1 cd/2  ε2γ−1d/2 thus equation (A.25) can be bounded by any power of ε so we
take this to be ε2.
Using the previous Lemma, we have:
h

(⋆)
ερ(x)2

= h
∥u −ετκ−1∇l∥2
ερ(x)2
+ Θ4(u) + Θ5(u)
ερ(x)2
+ O(ε2, ∥u∥4)

(A.26)
Now expanding h about (ερ2)−1∥u −ετκ−1∇l∥2, we have:
h
∥u −ετκ−1∇l∥2
ερ2

+ Θ4(u) + Θ5(u)
ερ2
h′
∥u −ετκ−1∇l∥2
ερ2

+ O(ε2, ∥u∥4)
(A.27)
For convenience, let ξ denote (ερ2)−1∥u −ετκ−1∇l∥2, we can then write:
εd/2Gεf(x) =
Z
h (ξ) f(y)dy +
Z Θ4(u)
ερ2 h′(ξ)f(y)dy +
Z Θ5(u)
ερ2 h′(ξ)f(y)dy
(A.28)
where integrals are over the domain B(x, εγ). The first term is a local kernel, and taking a Taylor expansion
of f about x, the second term becomes:
f(x)
Z
Θ4(u)
ερ(x)2 h′(ξ)du +
Z
Θ4(u)
ερ(x)2 h′(ξ)ui
∂˜f
∂si
du + O(ε2, ∥u∥4)
(A.29)
and the term becomes:
f(x)
Z
Θ5(u)
ερ(x)2 h′(ξ)du + O(ε2, ∥u∥4)
(A.30)
respectively. Since the tails of the integral ε−d/2 R
Kε(x, y)f(y)dy when extended to Rd are of order O(ε2),
we extend the three integrals above to the full tangent space. Since the first term is a local kernel, we will
have:
ε−d/2
Z
Rd h
∥u −ετκ−1∇l∥2
ερ2

f(y)dy = m(x)f(x) + ε(ω(x)f(x) + ˜Lf(x)) + ε3/2Ω(x) + O(ε2)
(A.31)
49


where ˜L = ˜µ(x) · ∇+ ˜D(x)∆and the zeroth-, first- and second-order moments are as given in equation (1)
of [11] and take the form:
m(x) =
Z
TxM
h

∥z∥2
ρ(x)2

dz
(A.32)
˜µ(x) = m(x) τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x) =: m(x)µ(x)
(A.33)
˜D(x) = m(x) · m(x)−1 1
2
Z
TxM
z2
1 · h

∥z∥2
ρ(x)2

dz =: m(x)D(x)
(A.34)
From this we see that ˜L = ˜µ(x) · ∇+ 1
2 ˜D(x)∆= m(x) [µ(x) · ∇+ D(x)∆] =: m(x)L.
Now making the
substitution u 7→ε1/2z we have:
Θ4(u) 7→ε2
 
px,4(z) + τ(x)2

1 −∥∇l(x)∥2
κ(x)2

−2τ(x)
κ(x)zizj
∂2˜l
∂si∂sj
!
(A.35)
Θ5(u) 7→ε5/2

px,5(z) −2τ(x)
κ(x)px,3(z)

(A.36)
Defining Θ′
4(z) and Θ′
5(z) to be the two terms in parentheses, respectively, and noting that h′(ξ) contributes
no additional powers of ε after this substitution, we can define:
ωl(x) := ω(x) +
Z Θ′
4(z)
ρ(x)2 h′(ξ)dz
(A.37)
Ωl(x) := Ω(x) +
Z Θ′
4(z)
ρ(x)2 h′(ξ)zi
∂˜f
∂si
dz + f(x)
Z Θ′
5(z)
ρ(x)2 h′(ξ)dz
(A.38)
Putting this together with the local kernels expansion of equation (A.31), we arrive at the expansion:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2)
(A.39)
This completes the first part of the proof. To verify the expansion of the normalised integral operator
Pεf(x) = (Gε1(x))−1Gεf(x), we note that:
Gε1(x) = m(x)

1 + εωl(x)
m(x) + ε3/2 Ωl(x)
m(x) + O(ε2)

(A.40)
where we have used the fact that L1 ≡0.
For sufficiently small ε we can use the expansion
1
1+x =
1 −x + x2 −. . . , and find that, up to order ε3/2:
Pεf(x) = Gεf(x)
Gε1(x) = m(x)−1 · (m(x)f(x) + εωl(x)f(x) + εm(x)Lf(x))

1 −εωl(x)
m(x)

+ O(ε3/2)
(A.41)
= f(x) + εωl(x)
m(x)f(x) + εLf(x) −εωl(x)
m(x)f(x) + O(ε3/2)
(A.42)
= f(x) + εLf(x) + O(ε3/2)
(A.43)
which completes the proof.
The associated expansion for the adjoint operator is done in the weak sense, which other shows that up
to the resolution of the L2(M) inner product, the operator A is equal to the operator B when applied to
some f ∈L2(M) ∩Dom(A) ∩Dom(B) is for any g ∈L2(M) ∩Dom(A) ∩Dom(B), we have ⟨g, Af⟩L2(M) =
⟨g, Bf⟩L2(M). To do this, we must restrict the domain of f to be in C3(M)∩L2(M), and thus the Theorem
and proof are as follows:
50


Theorem A.2. Let Kε(x, y) be an Ordered Diffusion Kernel under the same aassumptions as Theorem
A.1, then, in the weak sense, the family of adjoint integral operator {G∗
ε}ε>0 admit the following asymptotic
expansion as ε →0 when applied to a test function f ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M):
G∗
εf(x) := ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε(y, x)f(y)dy = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2),
(A.44)
where L∗is the formal adjoint of L given in Theorem A.1, this operator takes the form ([30], p320):
L∗f(x) = −div (f(x)µ(x)) + ∆(D(x)f(x)),
(A.45)
where µ(x) and D(x) are the normalised first and second moments of Kε, as given in Theorem A.1. The
normalised adjoint integral operator can thus be expanded in terms of ε as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗f(x) + O(ε3/2).
(A.46)
Proof of Theorem 3.2. Let g ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M) be an arbitrary test function, then:
⟨g, G∗
εf⟩=
Z
M
g(x)G∗
εf(x)dx =
Z
M
Z
M
g(x)Kε(y, x)f(y)dydx
(A.47)
=
Z
M
f(y)
Z
M
Kε(y, x)g(x)dxdy =
Z
M
f(y)Gεg(y)dy
(A.48)
=
Z
M
f(y)
h
m(y)g(y) + ε(ωl(y)g(y) + ˜Lg(y)) + O(ε3/2)
i
dy
(A.49)
= ⟨f, mg + εωlg⟩+ ε⟨˜Lg, f⟩+ O(ε3/2) =
D
g, mf + ε(ωlf + L∗(mf)) + O(ε3/2)
E
(A.50)
where in equation (A.48) we have switched the order of integration and in equation (A.50) we have used the
fact ⟨f, gh⟩= ⟨fh, g⟩and, recalling that ˜Lg(x) = m(x)Lg(x), we have used the fact that:
⟨˜Lg, f⟩= ⟨mLg, f⟩= ⟨Lg, mf⟩= ⟨g, L∗(mf)⟩
(A.51)
Therefore ⟨g, G∗
εf⟩= ⟨g, mf + ε(ωlf + L∗(mf)) + O(ε3/2)⟩, so in the weak sense:
G∗
εf(x) = mf + ε(ωlf + L∗(mf)⟩+ O(ε3/2)
(A.52)
which completes the first part of the proof.
To prove the expansion for the associated normalised adjoint operator, we again employ the expansion
(Gε1(x))−1 = m(x)−1 
1 −ε ωl(x)
m(x)

+ O(ε3/2), and:
G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f)(x) = (Gε1(x))−1 [m(x)f(x) + εωl(x)f(x)] + εL∗
 mf
Gε1

(x) + O(ε3/2)
(A.53)
= f(x) + εL∗f(x) + O(ε3/2)
(A.54)
which completes the proof.
It is worth making a short practical comment about κ(x), which we introduced as a function of utility,
acting more like a hyperparameter of the kernel than a parameter needing to be inferred; we did this
because it allows one to decouple the scale of the ordering function (which has no effect on the LQO, ≤l,
that it implies) from the magnitude of the drift-term, thus separating the task of inferring direction and
magnitude cleanly. If one wishes to make the kernel entirely agnostic to the scale of l(x), then one should set
κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥. In the proofs of Theorem 3.1, we assumed that κ(x) was bounded away from zero, but if l(x)
is chosen arbitrarily and κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥, then this might not always be the case, thus creating a singularity
within the kernel. If this occurs let Mc denote a connected critical submanifold of l(x) - where we note
dim(Mc) can equal any value from 0 (an isolated critical point) to d (an entire critical region) - then there
are three possible courses of action: firstly, one could attempt to mollify l(x) into a new function ˜l(x) that
implies an identical ordering but avoids the criticality, this is only guaranteed to be possible when the critical
51


submanifold is of dimension (d−1) and l(x) is strictly monotonic on the leaves of the implied foliation of some
open region containing the critical manifold. More precisely, there must exist a d-dimensional neighbourhood
U of the (d −1)-dimensional critical submanifold, Mc, such that there exists a submersion φ : U →R with
φ−1(0) = Mc, and a smooth strictly monotonic function f : φ(U) →l(U) such that l|U = f ◦φ; the mollified
˜l(x) is then constructed as a smooth gluing of l|M\U and the submersion φ. In all other cases, one can
either enforce a uniform lower bound on κ(x) (i.e. define ˜κ(x) = max(κ(x), c) for c > 0 as small as the
data allows), this will result in a new drift-term τ(x) ∇l(x)
˜κ(x) which strictly underestimates the magnitude of
the velocity in the set {x ∈M : 0 < κ(x) < c}, but on the critical manifold - since we know the drift term
will be zero19 - the dynamics will be as desired; if dim(Mc) = d this is the only available correction. The
final course of action that can be applied if dim(Mc) < d is to simply cut out the critical manifold(s) and
treat them like boundaries of the new manifold M \ Mc, thus referring us back to the previous discussion.
Unless the critical manifold has very specific dynamical significance, and thus underestimating the dynamics
would be damaging, it is likely more practical to simply apply a uniform lower bound on κ(x) or to mollify
away the critical submanifold if possible or to change the form of κ(x) altogether. When working with real
data, in all cases except where l(x) has been constructed to have a d-dimensional critical submanifold, it is
highly unlikely that we would ever numerically compute the derivative of l(x) to be so close to zero as to
cause a singularity in our kernel. This is simply due to the fact that whenever dim(Mc) < d we will have
vol(Mc) = 0, is a set of measure zero and thus is unlikely to bother us in practice; indeed depending on how
one numerically computes ∥∇l(x)∥is may already be reasonable to clamp κ(x) between a lower and upper
value to avoid anomalous estimates skewing ones results.
A.1
Local-Ordered Diffusion Kernels
To prove the expansion result of the locally Ordered Diffusion Kernel (lODK), we only assume that the
local ordering function, l(x, y), is defined on a restricted domain in the second argument; thus, there is an
additional technical consideration that we will discuss first before completing the proof without ambiguity.
In the proof of Theorem 3.1 we take γ ∈(0, 1
2) and consider the integral of the kernel about x over M in
a ball of radius εγ. But the local ordering function at x ∈M, written lx : Ux →R : y 7→l(x, y), is only
assumed to be defined on a restricted domain; it is always possible to extend lx : Ux →R smoothly to all
of M, so the integral in Gεf outside of B(x, εγ) are still well-defined and of order O(ε2), as discussed in
the proof of Theorem A.1, but we need to make sure that the integral inside the ball is independent of this
extension.
In light of the discussion of the local ordering function given in Appendix B.1, we know that the domain
of lx is an open neighbourhood of x over which the exponential map must be a diffeomorphism; we can frame
this in terms of the injectivity radius of expx, which is defined as:
inj(x) = sup{r > 0 : expx |B(0,r) is a diffeomorphism onto its image.}
(A.55)
Thus, we can require that Ux ⊆exp−1
x (inj(x)), although we note that the exponential map will be diffeo-
morphic on a star-shaped open set and thus we are taking a restriction by requiring Ux to be a ball. We
assume in the statement of this Theorem that M has bounded geometry, which means there exists some
c > 0 such that infx∈M inj(x) = c, and thus we can take the domain of each Ux = exp−1
x (B(0, c)) and by
nature of the exponential map being an isometry we need to choose ε small enough such that ε ≤c1/γ; such
a ε guarantees that the asymptotic expansion of Gεf(x) is valid uniformly across all x. When we compute
the integral in Gεf(x) we are implicitly taking any bounded C2(M × M) extension of l(x, y), and taking
the integral over all y ∈M.
After making this consideration, we can state and prove the expansion of lODKs in much the same
manner as we have done previously:
Theorem A.3 (Expansion of locally Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian
manifold with bounded geometry embedded in Rn, and with the metric inherited from the standard Euclidean
metric. Let l(x, y) be a C2(Dom(l)) local ordering function of two inputs and let b(x) = ∇lx(x). For the
19The only critical manifold in which the ordering function l(x) implies a direction is the aforementioned monotonic (d −1)-
dimensional critical submanifold case.
52


lODK Kε(x, y), as defined in 3.2, and for any f ∈C3(M) we have the following asymptotic expansion of
the associated family of backward integral operators {Gε}ε>0 as ε →0, applied to f:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lbf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2)
(A.56)
at a point x ∈M a distance larger than εγ from ∂M, for a fixed γ ∈(0, 1/2). The second-order differential
operator Lb takes the form:
Lbf(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)b(x) · ∇f(x) + 1
2D(x)∆f(x)
(A.57)
In the above, m(x) and D(x) are as in Theorem A.1. The normalised integral operators and their Laplacians,
defined in the usual way, can be expanded as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLbf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = Lbf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.58)
Analogous to the previous theorems, the family of adjoint operators, {G∗
ε}ε>0, satisfies the following asymp-
totic expansion, in the weak sense, when applied to f ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M):
G∗
εf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
b(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(A.59)
where L∗
b is the formal adjoint of Lb and takes the form:
L∗
bf(x) = −div

f(x) τ(x)
κ(x)b(x)

+ ∆(D(x)f(x))
(A.60)
The normalised adjoint integral operator P ∗
ε f = G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f) and its Laplacian can be expanded as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
bf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
bf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.61)
Proof of Theorem 3.3. Fix some γ ∈(0, 1/2) and take any x ∈M that is at least a distance εγ from the
boundary of M; noting that a local ordering function is defined such that l(x, x) = 0 for any x ∈M, we can
write:
l(x, y) = lx(y) = ui
∂˜lx
∂ui
+ 1
2uiuj
∂2 ˜lx
∂ui∂uj
+ px,3(u) + O(∥u∥4)
(A.62)
by definition of b(x) we have ∂˜lx
∂ui (0) = bi(x); therefore our kernel can be written as:
h
∥y −x∥2
ερ(x)2
−τ(x)l(x, y)
ρ(x)2κ(x) + ετ(x)2
ρ(x)2

= h
∥u −εb(x)∥2
ερ(x)2
+ Θ4(u) + Θ5(u)
ερ(x)2
+ O(ε2, ∥u∥4)

(A.63)
Which we see is identical to equation (A.26) in the proof of Theorem A.1; so after taking any arbitrary C2
extension of lx(y) to all of M we can conclude immediately that:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lbf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2)
(A.64)
and:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLbf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = Lbf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.65)
where Lb = τ
κb · ∇+ D(x)∆, and D(x) = 1
2σh(x)2ρ(x)2 as before. Setting τ(x) = κ(x) ≡1 gives the general
form of the infinitesimal generator of an Itˆo SDE with drift b(x) and isotropic diffusion 1
2D(x)Id. The proof
of the adjoint expansion is identical to the proof of Theorem A.2 and is done in the weak sense, to give:
G∗
εf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
b(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(A.66)
and:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
bf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
bf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.67)
which completes the proof.
53


A.2
Anisotropic-Ordered Diffusion Kernels
In the definition of an anisotropic ODK, we have the term (y −x)T A(x)−1(y −x), where A is a symmetric,
uniformly elliptic
 2
0

-tensor field on M. However, the meaning of this weighted inner product is ambiguous:
suppose ι : M →Rn is our isotropic embedding of M — for now, let us denote for any x ∈M, ˜x = ι(x);
before we stated Lemma A.3 we noted that ∥y−x∥:= ∥˜y−˜x∥, which is sloppy notation but doesn’t cause any
issues. However, in an anODK, for a fixed x ∈M, and denoting B = A(x)−1 ∈Rd×d, then (˜y −˜x)T B(˜y −˜x)
does not make any sense as the dimensions are incompatible. So we either have to view B as being in Rn×n,
or y −x ∈Rd, if we suppose that A really is a (2, 0)-tensor field on M, which would make B a
 0
2

-tensor
field similar to the Riemannian metric tensor, then can resolve both interpretations through:
(y −x)T B(x)(y −x) := (˜y −˜x)T Dι(x)B(x)Dι(x)T (˜y −˜x)
(A.68)
Since we construct the normal coordinates and projection coordinates with respect to the same orthonormal
basis, we will have DιT Dι = Id by definition of the isometry, which makes the columns of Dι(x) ∈Rn×d the
orthonormal basis of the affine tangent space T˜xι(M) ⊂Rn, and thus the coordinate chart of the projection
coordinates around x will equal ϕx : U →Rd : y 7→Dι(x)T (ι(y) −ι(x)). Therefore, assuming B(x) has
been written in projection coordinates, equation (A.68) will equal uT A−1u exactly. We can also view this
equation as before with ˜y −˜x unchanged and with the symmetric quadratic form being with respect to
˜B(x) := Dι(x)B(x)Dι(x)T ∈Rn×n, where naturally ˜B will be a rank-d n × n matrix.
The more complex case arises if we don’t consider ˜B(x) to be a projection onto the tangent space, i.e.
we view y −x as ι(y) −ι(x) and ˜B(x) ∈Rn×n is a symmetric uniformly elliptic matrix with rank greater
than d. Theoretically, we can avoid such cases by restricting to the tangent space, but in practice, one might
encounter a situation such as this if one constructs ˜B from the local covariance structure of the embedded
data D ⊂Rn. To handle this we will have to establish the following notation: for ι : M →ι(M) =: ˜
M ⊂Rn,
we denote by T˜x ˜
M ⊂Rn and N˜x ˜
M ⊂Rn the ambient tangent and normal bundles of M induced by ι. We
note that for every ˜x ∈˜
M, we will have T˜xRn = T˜x ˜
M ⊕N˜x ˜
M; we will assume that A is symmetric positive
semi-definite
 2
0

-tensor field on Rn; furthermore, we assume A can be decomposed through the direct sum
A⊤⊕A⊥, where A⊤is a symmetric rank-d uniformly elliptic tensor-field on the subbundle T 2
0 ˜
M ≤T 2
0 Rn,
and A⊥is a symmetric, potentially degenerate tensor field on the subbundle N 2
0 ˜
M ≤T 2
0 Rn. We note that
in a much more canonical setting of equation (A.68) — which we note is also the setting of local kernels —
this is equivalent to this latter scenario but with B⊥| ˜
M ≡0(n−d)×(n−d).
Since A⊤is everywhere rank-d on a d-dimensional vector space, its inverse will always exist, so let us
denote this with B⊤(i.e. B⊤A⊤= A⊤B⊤= Id). Given this setup, we provide the following generalisation
of the metric comparison Lemma given in A.3:
Lemma A.4 (Generalised Metric Comparison). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold that can
be embedded in Rn, and let ˜B be a field of matrices over Rn such that ˜B| ˜
M = B⊤⊕B⊥where B⊤∈T 0
2 ˜
M
is a symmetric and uniformly elliptic rank-d 2-tensor field acting on tangent vectors of
˜
M, and B⊥∈N 0
2 ˜
M
is a symmetric, and potentially degenerate, 2-tensor field acting on normal vectors of
˜
M. For any x ∈M,
and ε sufficiently small, then ∀y ∈B(0, ε1/2), we will have:
(˜y −˜x)T ˜B(˜y −˜x) = uT B⊤u + px,4(u) + px,5(u) + O(ε3)
(A.69)
Proof. The projection coordinates, u, about any x ∈M are defined on a neighbourhood guaranteed by the
implicit function theorem; furthermore, there will exist a diffeomorphism g : Rd →Rn−d such that in this
neighbourhood, ˜y −˜x = (u, g(u))T . This function will satisfy g(0) = 0n−d and for any component of g
∂gj(0)
∂ui
= 0, since T˜x ˜
M is tangent to g at 0.
One should think of this g as encoding all the curvature of the manifold coming from the embedding
ι : M →˜
M. By the assumed decomposition ˜B on T˜x ˜
M we may write ˜B in these coordinates as the block
matrix:
˜B(x) =

B⊤(x)
0d×(n−d)
0(n−d)×d
B⊥(x)

(A.70)
We can now expand the matrix-vector product in Rn as:
(˜y −˜x)T ˜B(˜y −˜x) =
 u
g(u)
T
˜B
 u
g(u)

= uT B⊤u + g(u)T B⊥g(u)
(A.71)
54


For each component function, gk : Rd →R, we can take a Taylor expansion about 0:
gl(u) = 1
2
d
X
i,j=1
uiuj
∂2gl(0)
∂si∂sj
+ 1
6
d
X
i,j,k=1
uiujuk
∂3gl(0)
∂si∂sj∂sk
+ px,4(u) + O(∥u∥5)
(A.72)
where we have used the localised and tangential properties of g(u); we can represent this in vector form
through:
g(u) = px,2(u) + px,3(u) + px,4(u) + O(∥u∥5)
(A.73)
where px,k is a vector of dimension n −d in which each component is a homogeneous polynomial of degree
k. Plugging this into equation (A.71) and collecting higher order terms we deduce:
uT B⊤u + px,2(u)T B⊥px,2(u) + 2px,2(u)B⊥px,3(u) + O(∥u∥6)
(A.74)
= uT B⊤u +
n−d
X
i,j=1
(B⊥)ij(px,2(u))i(px,2(u))j + 2
n−d
X
i,j=1
(B⊥)ij(px,2(u))i(px,3(u))j
(A.75)
= uT B⊤u + px,4(u) + px,5(u) + O(∥u∥6)
(A.76)
completing the proof.
We can deduce from this Lemma that if we chose ˜B not to have this block diagonal structure, then the
cross terms between the tangent and normal bundles would manifest itself in a px,3(u) error term. Given
the schematic of the proof for Theorem A.1, we will end up with an integral term equal to:
√ε
ρ2
Z
Rd px,3(z −√εµA)(f + √ε⟨(z −√εµA), ∇f⟩)h′
zT B⊤z
ρ2

dz + O(ε3/2)
(A.77)
we note that px,3(z −√εµA) = px,3(z) + √εpx,2(z) + εpx,1(z) + O(ε3/2); since we are integrating over a
symmetric domain and h′(zT B⊤z/ρ2) is an even function, after expanding the integrand we can set some of
these integrals to zero and others we can collect in the ωAf and O(ε3/2) terms, however the following term
does not collapse into any other:
ε
ρ2 ∇f·
Z
Rd zzT B⊤⊥



zT ∇2g1(0)z
...
zT ∇2gn−d(0)z


h′
zT B⊤z
ρ2

dz
(A.78)
ε
ρ2
d
X
i,j,k,l=1
n−d
X
m=1
(B⊤⊥)jm
∂2gm(0)
∂sk∂sl
∂if
Z
Rd zizjzkzlh′
zT B⊤z
ρ2

dz
(A.79)
Since this depends on the integral of a positive even function over a symmetric domain, it will not vanish;
and thus we would resolve an additional advection term in the Laplacian, which would depend on the
curvature of the manifold at ˜x and something like the fourth moment of our kernel (which is a measure of
peakedness/heavy-tails). If h(u) = exp(−u/2), and thus h′(u) = −1
2 exp(−u/2), then dividing this integral
by mA(x) would yield:
−ε
2ρ6
d
X
i,j,k,l=1
n−d
X
m=1
(B⊤⊥)jm
∂2gm(0)
∂sk∂sl
∂if [(B⊤)ij(B⊤)kl + (B⊤)ik(B⊤)jl + (B⊤)il(B⊤)jk]
(A.80)
where we have applied Isserlis’s Theorem to compute the fourth moments. Now that we understand why
we have constrained our matrix ˜B, and recalling that when B⊥| ˜
M ≡0(n−d)×(n−d) we return to the case
of equation (A.68) — which is the theoretically proper setting — we can continue by generalising the
ODK metric equation, given in Lemma A.3, to anisotropic diffusions; we denote an anODK as Kε(x, y) =
h

⋆⋆
ερ(x)2

:
55


Lemma A.5. Under the same conditions as Lemma A.4, and denoting an anODK as Kε(x, y) = h

⋆⋆
ερ(x)2

,
we have:
(⋆⋆) := (y −x)T ˜B(y −x) + (l(x, y) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
κ(x)2
−l(x, y)2
κ(x)2
(A.81)
= (u −εµA(x))T B⊤(u −εµA(x)) + Θ4(u) + Θ5(u) + O(ε3, ε∥u∥4)
(A.82)
where µA = τ(x)
κ(x)A⊤∇lx(x), and Θ4(u) and Θ5(u) are expressions of order O(ε2) and O(ε5/2), respectively.
Proof. Using Lemma A.4 and expanding l(x, y) about x, and letting b(x) = ∇lx(x) we arrive at:
2τ(x)
κ(x)l(x, y) = 2τ(x)
κ(x)(uT b(x) + px,2(u) + px,3(u)) = 2τ(x)
κ(x)uT B⊤A⊤b(x) + 2τ(x)
κ(x)(px,2 + px,3(u))
(A.83)
where we have used the fact that B−1
⊤
exists (by assumption of uniformly elliptic on T˜x ˜
M) and this inverse
is A⊤. Combining this with the expansion of other terms gives us:
uT B⊤u −2ετ(x)
κ(x)uT B⊤A⊤b(x) + ε2 τ(x)2
κ(x)2 ∥B1/2
⊤A⊤b(x)∥2 + Θ4(u) + Θ5(u) + O(ε3, ε∥u∥4)
(A.84)
= (u −εµA(x))T B⊤(u −εµA(x)) + Θ4(u) + Θ5(u) + O(ε3, ε∥u∥4)
(A.85)
where µA(x) := τ(x)
κ(x)A⊤(x)b(x), and:
Θ4(u) = px,4(u) + ε2τ(x)2
 
1 −∥B1/2
⊤A⊤b(x)∥2
κ(x)2
!
−2ετ(x)
κ(x)px,2(u)
(A.86)
Θ5(u) = px,5(u) −2ετ(x)
κ(x)px,3(u)
(A.87)
completing the proof.
Theorem A.4 (Expansion of Anisotropic Ordered Diffusion Kernels, Revised). Under the same assumptions
as theorem 3.1, the anisotropic ODK has the expansion:
Gεf(x) = mA(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + mA(x)LAf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2),
(A.88)
where mA(x) = m(x)
p
|A(x)| where m(x) is the zeroth-moment from theorem 3.1. The second-order differ-
ential operator, LA, takes the form:
LAf(x) = µA(x) · ∇f(x) + trDA ∇2f(x) = µi
A(x)∂if(x) + Dij
A(x)∂i∂jf(x)
(A.89)
where in the second equality we have written this operator in Euclidean normal coordinates (and we note that
the trace of a
 0
2

-tensor T with respect to a
 2
0

-tensor B is defined to equal trB T = BijTji). The first and
second order moments µA(x) and DA(x) satisfy:
µA(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)A(x)∇l(x) = A(x)µ(x)
(A.90)
DA(x) = 1
2mA(x)−1
Z
TxM
zzT h
zT A(x)−1z
ρ(x)2

d z = 1
2σh(x)2ρ(x)2A(x) = A(x)D(x)
(A.91)
where µ(x) and D(x) are the same as in theorem 3.1. The normalised backward integral operator and its
Laplacian can be expanded in terms of ε as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLAf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = LAf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.92)
analogously to theorem 3.2, in the weak sense the adjoint operator satisfies:
G∗
εf(x) = mA(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
A(fmA)(x)) + O(ε3/2),
(A.93)
56


where L∗
A is the adjoint of the operator LA in theorem 3.4, satisfying ⟨f, L∗
Ag⟩L2 = ⟨LAf, g⟩L2 for any
f, g ∈L2(M), this operator takes the form ([30], p320):
L∗
Af(x) = −div (f(x)µA(x)) + ∆(DA(x)f(x)) = −∂i(f(x)µi
A(x)) + ∂i∂j(Dij
A(x)f(x))
(A.94)
and the normalised adjoint integral operator and its Laplacian can be expanded as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
Af(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
Af(x) + O(ε1/2).
(A.95)
Proof of Theorem 3.4. Fix some γ ∈(0, 1/2) and take any x ∈M that is at least a distance εγ from the
boundary of M; from Lemma A.4 we see that the only difference between our expansion in the proof of
Theorem A.1 and what we have currently is the terms inside h(·) are of the form (u −εµA)T B⊤(u −εµA)
which is still a local kernel and thus we can still apply Lemma 3.9 from [11] to arrive at:
Gεf(x) = mA(x)f(x) + ε(ωA(x)f(x) + mA(x)LAf(x)) + ε3/2ΩA(x) + O(ε2)
(A.96)
Where mALA = ˜LA and ˜LA = ˜µA · ∇+ tr ˜
DA∇2. The zeroth, first- and second-order moments of this local
kernel are:
mA(x) =
Z
TxM
h
zT B⊤(x)z
ρ(x)2

dz =
p
|A⊤(x)|m(x)
(A.97)
˜µA(x) = mA(x)τ(x)
κ(x)A(x)∇l(x) = mA(x)µA(x)
(A.98)
( ˜DA)ij(x) = 1
2
Z
TxM
zizjh
zT B⊤(x)−1z
ρ(x)2

dz =: mA(x)DA(x)
(A.99)
We note that, just as before, our Θ4(u) and Θ5(u) terms are well-behaved and thus have no bearing on the
expansion we derive. In much the same way as before, we can now immediately derive the expression for the
normalised backwards integral operator and the Laplacian:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLAf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = LAf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.100)
The expansion of the adjoint is computed in the weak sense as:
G∗
εf(x) = mA(x)f(x) + ε(ωA(x)f(x) + L∗
A(mAf)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(A.101)
and to finish the proof:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
Af(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
Af(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.102)
A.2.1
Viewing A(x) as a non-trivial Riemannian Metric
At the beginning of section 3.2 we explained that in definition 3.4 we split the diffusion, D(x) = 1
2ρ(x)2A(x),
into terms involving ρ(x)2 and A(x) so that we can discriminate between viewing A(x) as a diffusion and a
non-trivial Riemannian metric — we will now consider A(x) to be as in this latter case. The Riemannian
metric is a
 0
2

-symmetric tensor that defines an inner product on M, if u, v ∈TxM for some x ∈M,
then g(x)(u, v) = gij(x)uivj will be their inner product with respect to some coordinate system. We see
from equation (34) that A−1(x) acts like a metric on M, thus we set (g(x))ij = (A−1(x))ij — we will use
the convention that gij equals the (i, j)th element of the inverse metric and since g = A−1 we will denote
gij = Aij. The infinitesimal generator of an Itˆo SDE with gradient-flow drift given by µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)∇l(x), and
isotropic diffusion given by ρ(x)2Id defined on the manifold (M, g) would equal (dropping function inputs):
Lgf = τ
κg(∇gl, ∇gf) + 1
2ρ2∆gf = τ
κgij(gik∂kl)(gjm∂mf) + 1
2ρ2divg(∇gf)
(A.103)
= τ
κgij∂il∂jf + 1
2
ρ2
√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij∂jf

(A.104)
57


where
p
|g| =
p
|det(g)| is the volume element with respect to the metric g; ∆gf := divg(∇f) is the
Laplace-Beltrami operator; divg(X) = |g|−1/2∂i(|g|1/2Xi) the divergence; and ∇gf := gradg(f) = gij∂jf
is the gradient defined to be such that g(x)(grad(f)(x), v) = dfx(v) for all v ∈TxM where dfx ∈T ∗
xM is
the differential of f at x ∈M. This follows directly from Lf = τ
κ∇l · ∇f + 1
2ρ2∆f when the metric is the
standard Euclidean metric; all we have done is reparameterise all derivatives and inner products in terms
of the new metric. We first note that the observed coupling between µ = τ
κ∇l and µA = Aµ = gijµj is
now working in our favour, since by the ordering function not being aware of the rescaling of coordinates by
A(x)−1, it has implicity adapted to these coordinates. We see that the advection term in equation (A.89)
satisfies µA·∇f = Aijµj∂if = A−1
ij (Aikµk)(Ajl∂lf). However, it is not so simple for the second-order term in
equation (A.89), since trρ2A ∇2f = ρ2Aij∂i∂jf, but we can expand the Laplace-Beltrami operator as given
in equation (A.104) to be:
∆gf =
1
√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij∂jf

= gij∂i∂jf +
1
√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij
∂jf = trg ∇2f + ∇f · divg(g−1)
(A.105)
where divgT is usually defined to act on the rows of a
 2
0

-tensor T, i.e. (divgT)i = ∂jT ij, since g−1 is
symmetric we need not worry about this convention.
Hence, we see that the second-order term of the
Laplacian in equation (A.89), does not capture the effective drift due to variations in the volume element.
Reconstructing the Laplace-Beltrami operator with respect to a non-trivial Riemannian metric was consider
by Berry & Sauer in Local Kernels [11], where they navigated this same issue by defining a symmetrised
local kernel ¯Kε(x, y) = Kε(x, y) + Kε(y, x) whose Laplacian approximates the Laplace-Beltrami operator
with respect to some metric ˜g under the assumptions that D = {xi}m
i=1 can been sampled according to the
volume measure on M defined by ˜g. This works because the adjoint kernel Kε(y, x) depends on A(y) as
y varies, thus allowing the symmetrised kernel to be aware of volumetric variations; the downside of their
construction is that they lose all other advection terms. We proceed by rewriting the missing advection term
from the Laplacian as:
1
√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij
∂jf =

∂igij + gij
1
√
|g|∂i
p
|g|

∂jf =

∂igij + gij∂i log
p
|g|

∂jf
(A.106)
which we can see is defining a vector field µeff =
 ∂igij + 1
2gij∂i log |g|

∂j which we advect f along. In order
for us to be able to recapture this term we need it be true that there exists functions a, φ : M →R such
that µeff(x) = a(x)∇φ(x), let ω = µ♭
eff ∈T ∗M be this vector-fields associated 1-form, then we know that
dω = da ∧dω, and therefore we know that ω ∧dω = 0 (since adφ ∧da ∧dφ ≡0), but the converse is not
necessarily true. The intuition behind this constraint (that one might notice is the Frobenius integrability
condition) is that for any x ∈M where ω̸ = 0, then Bx{v ∈TxM : ωx(v) = 0} defines a (d −1)-dimensional
subspace of TxM, we can stich this subspaces together to get (d −1)-dimensional submanifolds of M, very
much like the level sets of an ordering function. The differential dω, effectively measures how close ω is to
being (locally) generated by the gradient of a scalar function — we can see this from the previous argument
that ω = adφ
=⇒
ω ∧dω = 0 — strictly, dω is measuring the circulations of ω around x (i.e.
the
rotational dynamics). The condition ω ∧dω = 0 is weaker than ω = adφ, because it allows for singularities
when µeff(x) = 0, just as in our discussion of handling poorly conditioned ordering functions earlier. Thus,
quite poetically, for us to represent the infinitesimal generator of the Itˆo SDE dxt = τ
κ∇l dt + ρdwt on a
Riemannian manifold with non-trivial metric (M, A−1) as given in equation (A.104), and where l(x) is an
ordering function (almost) foliating the manifold, then the effective drift implied by the metric A−1 in the
form of the Laplace-Beltrami operator must also (almost) foliate the manifold into sets perpendicular to its
advection.
We will now assume that div(g−1) = 0, which immediately implies µeff = Aij|A|1/2∂i|A|−1/2 = 1
2Aij∂i log |A|−1
and thus is effectively generated by a potential; we will now show how you can reconstruct the desired lim-
iting operator using: mODKs from section 3.1.1; α-regularised ODKs from section 3.3; and stODKs from
section 3.2.1. The condition that div(A)(x) ≡0 makes A into a stress-tensor field and roughly means that
there are no sources of sinks of weight in the coordinate functions of A; effectively, A(x) is the diffusion
equivalent of a gradient-flow drift, but in a more structure way than if we only have ω ∧dω = 0. In all of
what follows, we assume that σ2
h ≡1.
Firstly, if using mODKs we can simply add another ordering function, ˜l(x) = 1
2 log |A(x)|−1, with ˜τ and
58


˜κ satisfying ˜κ−1˜τ = 1
2ρ2, merging this with the anisotropic ODK will give a limiting operator:
Lm
A f = A

τ
κ∇l + 1
2ρ2∇log
1
√
|A|

· ∇f + 1
2ρ2 trA ∇2f
(A.107)
= τ
κAij∂jl∂if + 1
2ρ2
p
|A|Aij∂j

1
√
|A|

∂if + Aij∂i∂jf

(A.108)
where, given that ∂iAij ≡0, the second term in brackets equals ∆A−1f. This produces the correct limiting
operator, but the associated transition probabilities treat the effective drift due to variations in the volume
element as an actual drift. We can achieve a similar expansion by assuming that the sampling measure, q(x),
is uniform with respect to the volume form, or in other words q(x) ∝|A(x)|−1/2, and setting α = 1
2 in the
α-regularised ODK (where the α-regularisation was introduced in [21]), this results in:
Lq
Af = τ
κA∇l · ∇f + 1
2ρ2A∇q
q · ∇f + 1
2ρ2 trA ∇2f
(A.109)
= τ
κAij∂jl∂if + 1
2ρ2
p
|A|Aij∂j

1
√
|A|

∂jf + Aij∂i∂jf

(A.110)
where again the expression inside the brackets equals ∆A−1f when ∂iAij ≡0. We note that the assumption on
the sampling density can be turned around and thought of as choosing A(x) such that this covariance matrix
is the best fit to the data; furthermore, given we assume our data is generated by some dynamical process, it is
likely true that the covariance that best fits the data and the underlying covariance σ(x)σ(x)T will be highly
correlated at any x ∈M. We also add that if A(x) = ρ2Id, then |A(x)|−1/2 = ρ−d, so if ρ(x) ∝∥x −xk∥
where xk is the kth closest sample in D to any x ∈M, then by the simplest possible approximation to
the sampling density we would already have q(x) ∝∥x −xk∥−d [60]; having q(x) ∝|A(x)|−1/2 is thus the
simplest anisotropic generalisation of this result.
In a similar vein to the previous reasoning we could define an stODK, as described in section 3.2.1,
with ρ1(x) ∝|A(x)|η/2ρ2 and ρ2(y) ∝|A(y)|−η/2 with proportionality such that ρ(x)−2 [ρ1(x)ρ2(x)] =
[η(d + 2)]−1, then after combining the anisotropic ODK with the self-tuning ODK (replace all occurences of
ρ(x)2 in equation (34) with ρ1(x)ρ2(y)), we will find the limiting operator to be:
Lst
Af = τ
κA∇l · ∇f + d+2
2 ρ1A∇ρ2 · ∇f + 1
2 trA ∇2f
(A.111)
= τ
κAij∂jl∂if + η d+2
2 ρ1ρ2
p
|A|Aij∂j

|A|−1/2
∂if + 1
2Aij∂i∂jf
(A.112)
= τ
κAij∂jl∂if + 1
2ρ2 p
|A|Aij∂j

|A|−1/2
∂if + Aij∂i∂jf

(A.113)
where the expression in brackets equals ∆A−1f when ∂iAij ≡0.
To gain some intuition, let us define
ρA(x) =
p
|A(x)|
1/d to be the dth root of the inverse volume form, and which can be thought of as a
length scale (geometric mean of length scales along different dimensions) with respect to the metric A−1,
then in the above formulation ρ2 ∝ρ−ηd
A
and, assuming ρ ∝ρA, we will also have ρ1 ∝ρηd+2
A
, with the
product ρ1ρ2 ∝ρ2
A combining nicely into a factor that is of the desired dimensionality. If η = 1, then ρ2 is
proportional to the volume form and, and thus we are biasing rescaling the terms of the ODK inside h(·)
by a factor proportional to volA−1(x)/volA−1(y), thus biasing towards transitioning to higher volume (or
lower density if q(x) ∝|A(x)|−1/2) states; in addition ρ1 ∝ρd+2
A
which fits nicely with the factor of (d + 2)
in the self-tuning bandwidth formulation of ODK, recalling that this factor initially comes from making a
substitution within an integral and thus it makes sense why taking ρ2 to be a volume form would recover
this. If we take η = −1/d, then ρ1 ∝ρA and ρ2 ∝ρA, which is a much more familiar symmetric bandwidth
formulation (i.e. β = 1/2 regularisation in section 3.2.1), thus with the correct constants of proportionality
we can also use stODKs to recapture the Laplace-Beltrami operator when ∂iAij ≡0.
To summarise, we have extended ODKs to anisotropic diffusions at the cost of coupling the drift and
diffusion in the infinitesimal generator; analogous to how TMDmap kernels couple drift and diffusion un-
avoidably. We then proposed to approximate the uncoupled anisotropic transition operator by using the
Strang Splitting scheme, and as a result we are capable (especially upon combining anODKs with lODKs)
59


of approximating the infinitesimal generator of an arbitrary Itˆo process. We then discussed how one can
interpret the anisotropic covariance matrix A(x) as a non-trivial Riemannian metric; in this scenario, the
coupling we observed between the first- and second-order terms now works in our favour, but the second-order
term only captures the trace of the Hessian and thus does not approximate the Laplace-Beltrami operator
with respect to A−1. We showed that under some mild constraints on A−1, namely that the effective drift
it implies is capable of (almost) foliating M with its tranverse submanifolds; this is an interesting condition
as it is effectively identical to the discussion we had in section 2.2 about what makes l(x) a good ordering
function. Under this constraint, we show that one can reconstruct the full infinitesimal generator (advection
term and Laplace-Beltrami term) by applying multi-Ordered Diffusion Kernels discussed in section 3.1.1;
α-regularised ODKs as discussed in section 3.3; and self-tuning ODKs as discussed in the next section. Using
an mODK makes the effective drift very real from the perspective of the transition probabilities, which is
a technical inaccuracy but is easy to apply; α-normalised ODKs are the most satisfying method but they
require that the sampling distribution q(x) is uniform with respect to the volume form |A|−1/2; stODKs
reconstruct the effective drift in a truly effective manner, and do so with no extra constraints, however one
does need to be careful that proportionality constants satisfy η(d + 2)ρ1ρ2 = ρ2.
A.2.2
Self-Tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernels
In this appendix, we will provide the proof for the expansion of self-tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernels
(stODKs) as defined in section 3.2.1. All the difficulty in this proof is making a detailed accounting of all
the new integral terms that occur once you expand ρ2(y) about ρ2(x); this task can be greatly simplified
through the following Lemma:
Lemma A.6. Let (⋆) be as in Lemma A.3 written with either a local or global ordering function. Let ξ = (⋆)
ε ,
the following kernels will have the same limiting operator as h(ξ):
(i). h
 ξ + εk/2c(x)

for any integer k ≥2 and any bounded c(x),
(ii). h

ξ + px,a(u)
ε

for any integer a ≥4,
(iii). h (ξ + px,b(u)ξ) for any integer b ≥2.
Proof. All of these proofs will rely on expanding h(· · · ) about ξ, so let ζ be any of the additional terms, and
we will have:
h(ξ + ζ) = h(ξ) + ζh′(ξ) + 1
2ζ2h′′(ξ) + O(ζ3)
(A.114)
The validity of (ii) and (iii) will ultimately be determined by the validity of (i); thus, let us expand h(ξ +
εrc(x)) about h(ξ) in the backward integral operator:
εd/2Gεf(x) =
Z
h(ξ)f(y)dy + εk/2c(x)
Z
h′(ξ)f(y)dy + εkc(x)2
Z
h′′(ξ)f(y)dy + O(ε3k/2)
(A.115)
Since k ≥2, the third term in the above expression will be O(ε2); we also see that once we change the
integral to projection coordinates and substitute u 7→ε1/2z, the only integrals that are of lower order than
O(ε2) will be:
εk/2f(x)c(x)
Z
h′(ξ)dz + ε(k+1)/2c(x)
Z
h′(ξ)⟨u, ∇f⟩du + O(ε2)
(A.116)
If k ≥3, we see that the second term is now O(ε2) and the first term can be absorbed into the ε3/2Ωl(x),
and thus has no effect on the limiting operator; if k = 2, then similarly the first term can be absorbed
into εωl(x)f(x) and the second term can be absorbed into ε3/2Ωl(x), and again the limiting operator is
unchanged. This finishes the proof of (i).
To prove (ii) and (iii), we note that under the substitution u 7→ε1/2z, we will have:
px,a(u)
ε
7−→ε(a−2)/2px,a(z)
(A.117)
px,b(u)ξ 7−→εb/2px,b(z)∥z −ε1/2µ∥2
(A.118)
Thus, so long as a ≥4 in (ii), and b ≥2 in (iii), the same reasoning as was applied in the proof of (i) will
apply, and the limiting operator will be unchanged.
60


This Lemma effectively says that if a term is O(ε, ∥u∥2) inside of h(· · · ), then it will not have any effect
on the limiting operator for the Laplacian of an ODK. Taking the Taylor expansion of ρ2(y) about ρ2(x)
introduces many such terms, and thus the proof of the asymptotic expansion for stODKs will utilise this
Lemma multiple times. The statement and proof of the theorem is as follows:
Theorem A.5 (Expansion of Self-Tuning Ordered Diffusion Kernels). Suppose M is a d-dimensional Rie-
mannian manifold embedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the standard Euclidean metric in ambient
space. Let l ∈C2(M) be an ordering function (or a local ordering function), and let Kst
ε (x, y) be the corre-
sponding stODK, as defined in (3.5), with self-tuning bandwidth of the form ρ1(x)ρ2(y) for smooth functions
ρ1, ρ2 ∈C2(M) bounded uniformly away from zero. Then for any f ∈C3(M) the associated family of
backward integral operators {Gε}ε>0 admits the following asymptotic expansion as ε →0 when applied to f:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε (ωl(x)f(x) + m(x)Lstf(x)) + ε3/2Ωl(x) + O(ε2),
(A.119)
at a point x ∈M a distance larger than εγ from ∂M, for a fixed γ ∈(0, 1/2); and where ωl(x) depends on
the manifold and the kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and Ωl(x) depends on the manifold, the kernel Kε(x, ·) at x, and
also the test function f(x). The differential operator L is a second-order elliptic operator of the form:
Lstf(x) =

µ(x) + (d + 2)D(x)∇ρ2(x)
ρ2(x)

· ∇f(x) + D(x)∆f(x)
(A.120)
where m(x), µ(x) and D(x), satisfy:
m(x) =
Z
TxM
h

∥z∥2
ρ1(x)ρ2(x)

dz,
µ(x) = τ(x)
κ(x)b(x),
D(x) =
1
2σh(x)2ρ1(x)ρ2(x)
(A.121)
The normalised backward integral operators and their Laplacians can thus be expanded in terms of ε as:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLstf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lst
ε f(x) = Lstf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.122)
Analogous to previous theorems, the family of adjoint operators {G∗
ε}ε>0 satisfies the following asymptotic
expansion, in the weak sense, when applied to f ∈C3(M) ∩L2(M):
G∗
εf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
st(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(A.123)
where L∗
st is the formal adjoint of Lst and takes the form:
L∗
stf(x) = −div

f(x)

µ(x) + (d + 2)D(x)∇ρ2(x)
ρ2(x)

+ ∆(D(x)f(x))
(A.124)
The normalised adjoint integral operator P ∗
ε f = G∗
ε((Gε1)−1f) and its Laplacian can be expanded as:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
stf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
stf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.125)
Proof of Theorem A.5. Fix some γ ∈(0, 1/2) and take any x ∈M that is at least a distance εγ from the
boundary of M. The Taylor Expansion of ρ2(y) at x yields:
ρ2(y) = ρ2(x) + ⟨u, ∇ρ2(x)⟩+ px,2(u) + px,3(u) + O(∥u∥4)
(A.126)
Utiliting the expansion of
1
1+x = 1 −x + x2 −. . . , we deduce that:
1
ρ2(y) =
1
ρ2(x)
 1 −⟨u, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩+ px,2(u) + px,3(u)

+ O(∥u∥4)
(A.127)
Thus, letting ξ = ∥u −εµ∥2/(ερ1(x)ρ2(x)) and using the results of lemma A.3, the terms inside of h(· · · )
will equal:
ξ −ξ⟨u, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩+ ξ [px,2(u) + px,3(u)] + Θ4(u)
ερ1ρ2
+
Θ5(u)
ερ1ρ2
−Θ4(u)
ερ1ρ2
⟨u, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩

+ O(ε2, ∥u∥4)
(A.128)
61


Applying Lemma A.6, we see that the third term is of type (iii), and given the forms of Θ4(u) and Θ5(u)
given in the proof of Theorem A.1, these will be a mixture of type (i) and (ii) terms, and thus none of these
terms have any effect on the limiting operator of the self-tuning ODK. As a result, we will ignore these terms
entirely as if they weren’t there. Expanding h(· · · ) about h(ξ) are backward operator becomes:
εd/2Gεf(x) =
Z
h(ξ)f(y)dy −
Z
⟨u, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩ξh′(ξ)f(y)dy + 1
2
Z
⟨u, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩2ξ2h′′(ξ)f(y)dy + O(∥u∥5)
(A.129)
The first integral is a standard local kernel, and after setting ρ(x) =
p
ρ1(x)ρ2(x) we know the limiting
operator will equal L = µ · ∇+ 1
2σ2
hρ1ρ2∆, where σh(x)2 is as in equation (15). The third integral, by
the same reasoning as the proof given in Lemma A.6, will be absorbed into f(x)ωl(x) and Ωl(x) and thus
does not affect the limiting operator. Let (†) = −ε−d/2 R
⟨u, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩ξh′(ξ)f(y)dy, changing this integral to
projection coordinates and substituting u 7→ε1/2w, we find:
−(†) = ε−d/2
Z
⟨u, ∇ρ2
ρ2
⟩ξh′(ξ)f(y)dy = ε−d/2f
Z
⟨u, ∇ρ2
ρ2
⟩ξh′(ξ)du + ε−d/2
Z
⟨u, ∇f⟩⟨u, ∇ρ2
ρ2
⟩ξh′(ξ)du
(A.130)
= √εf
Z
Rd⟨w, ∇ρ2
ρ2
⟩ξh′(ξ)dw + ε
Z
Rd⟨w, ∇f⟩⟨w, ∇ρ2
ρ2
⟩ξh′(ξ)dw + O(ε3/2)
(A.131)
where we have extended the integral to the whole tangent space by using the fact that the tails are O(ε2); we
also note that ξ = ∥u−εµ∥2
ερ1ρ2
now takes the form ξ = ∥w−√εµ∥2
ρ1ρ2
. If we now make the substitution z = w −√εµ,
then the first term of equation (A.131) will break into two integrals of order √ε and ε in the following
manner:
√εf
Z
Rd⟨w, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩ξh′(ξ)dw = √εf
Z
Rd⟨z, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩ξh′(ξ)dz + εf⟨µ, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩
Z
Rd ξh′(ξ)dz
(A.132)
We notice that since ξh′(ξ) is symmetric about the origin in z-coordinates, the first integral will equal zero
since it is the integral of an odd function (since an odd function, z, multiplied by an even function, ξh′(ξ), is
itself odd) over a symmetric domain. The second term is of order O(ε) and equals some x-dependent value
(not depending on f) multiplied by f, and thus can be absorbed into the ωl(x)f(x) term of the expansion
given in Theorem A.1, and as we know these ωl(x) terms cancel upon normalisation by Gε1(x). Thus we
can entirely ignore the first integral in equation (A.131) and focus solely on the second integral, which, upon
making the same z substitution and collecting all higher-order terms into O(ε3/2), can be written as:
ε
Z
Rd⟨z, ∇f⟩⟨z, ρ−1
2 ∇ρ2⟩ξh′ (ξ) dz = ερ−1
2 ∂iρ2∂jf
Z
Rd zizjξh′ (ξ) dz = ερ−1
2 ∂iρ2∂if
Z
Rd z2
i ξh′ (ξ) dz (A.133)
where we have expanded the inner product terms and again used the fact that when i̸ = j zizj is an odd
function, and integrating an odd function over a symmetric domain cancels the integral. Since ξh′(ξ) is
symmetric in any component of z we need only compute the value for z1, thus we define the integral I(t)
parametrised by t > 0 to be:
I(t) =
Z
Rd z2
1h (ξt) dz = t−d+2
2
Z
Rd ˜z2
1h(ξ)d˜z = t−d+2
2 mσ2
hρ1ρ2
(A.134)
where in the second equality we have substituted ˜z =
√
tz, and in the final equality we have applied the fact
that m−1 R
z2
1h

∥z∥2
ρ1ρ2

dz = σ2
hρ1ρ2 as before. Taking the derivative of I(t) with respect to t gives:
I′(t) =
Z
Rd z2
1ξh′(ξt)dz = −d + 2
2
t−d+4
2 mσ2
hρ1ρ2
(A.135)
and we notice that
R
Rd z2
1ξh′(ξ)dz = I′(1) = −1
2(d + 2)mσ2
hρ1ρ2, and thus:
(†) = −ερ−1
2 ∂iρ2∂if
Z
Rd z2
i ξh′ (ξ) dz + O(ε3/2) = −ερ−1
2 ⟨∇ρ2, ∇f⟩I′(1) + O(ε3/2)
(A.136)
= εm(d + 2)Dst
∇ρ2
ρ2
· ∇f + O(ε3/2)
(A.137)
62


where Dst := 1
2σ2
hρ1ρ2. Putting this together with the local kernels expansion, we have:
Gεf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε
 ωst
l (x)f(x) + m(x)Lstf(x)

+ ε3/2Ωst
l (x) + O(ε2)
(A.138)
where Lstf = τ
κµ · ∇f + (d + 2)Dst
∇ρ2
ρ2 · ∇f + Dst∆f, and µ(x) = ∇l(x) or µ(x) = ∇lx(x) depending on
whether a local or global ordering function has been used. By normalising by Gε1(x) as before we find:
Pεf(x) = f(x) + εLstf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒Lεf(x) = Lstf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.139)
The proof of the adjoint expansion is identical to the proof of Theorem A.2 and is done in the weak sense,
to give:
G∗
εf(x) = m(x)f(x) + ε(ωl(x)f(x) + L∗
st(fm)(x)) + O(ε3/2)
(A.140)
and:
P ∗
ε f(x) = f(x) + εL∗
stf(x) + O(ε3/2) =⇒L∗
εf(x) = L∗
stf(x) + O(ε1/2)
(A.141)
which completes the proof.
An immediate corollary of this result is that it strengthens the proof given by Berry & Harlim in “Vari-
able Bandwidth Kernels” (VBKs, [10]) since in their Appendix A.3 they prove the expansion of the right-
formulation in the weak sense, whereas we do not take such a step, and by setting τ(x) ≡0, l(x) ≡0 and
κ(x) ≡1 we recover the form of a VBK. The reason Berry & Harlim cannot make such a step is because
of the order of operations they take in performing their normalisation. Particularly, they would need to
make a substitution of the form ˆy =
y−x
√
ρ2(y) + x, but such a substitution need not be invertible and thus
cannot be directly applied. If instead they took the expansion as we do, and then make the substitution
z 7→˜z/
p
ρ1(x)ρx(x), the integrals defining µ(x) and Dst(x) would provide the necessary factors of ρd/2
1
ρd/2
2
that VBKs use in their normalisation.
A.3
Density Regularised ODKs
In the literature, particularly in Diffusion Maps [21], they introduce an α ∈[0, 1] parameter to tune
the strength of density regularisation, with α = 0 being no density regularisation, α = 1/2 being their
Fokker-Planck normalisation, and α = 1 being fully regularised. This amounts to defining Kε,α(x, y) :=
Kε(x, y)q(y)−α and only makes sense if we change the integrals for the backward and forward integral op-
erators to be with respect to the underlying sampling measure q(x). In other words, we now consider the
operator:
Gε,αf(x) := ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε,α(x, y)f(y)q(y) dy = ε−d/2
Z
M
Kε(x, y)f(y)q(y)1−α dy = Gε(fq1−α)(x) (A.142)
from the results of Theorem 3.1 we can deduce the expansion of the non-uniform normalised transition
operator Pε,αf := (Gε,α1)−1Gε,αf, we can write this as:
Pε,αf = Gε(fq1−α)
Gε(q1−α) = Pε(fq1−α)
Pε(q1−α) = fq1−α + εL(fq1−α) + O(ε3/2)
q1−α + εL(q1−α) + O(ε3/2)
(A.143)
= qα−1(fq1−α + εL(fq1−α))(1 −εqα−1L(q1−α)) + O(ε3/2)
(A.144)
= f + εqα−1  L(fq1−α) −fL(q1−α)

+ O(ε3/2)
(A.145)
since Lf = µ · ∇f + D∆f, we can compute:
L(q1−α) = (1 −α)q−αµ · ∇q + D∆q1−α
(A.146)
L(fq1−α) = q1−αµ · ∇f + (1 −α)fq−αµ · ∇q + D
 f∆q1−α + q1−α∆f + 2(1 −α)q−α∇q · ∇f

(A.147)
putting this together, we deduce:
Pε,αf = f + εqα−1  q1−αµ · ∇f + D(q1−α∆f + 2(1 −α)q−α∇q · ∇f)

+ O(ε3/2)
(A.148)
= f + ε
 µ · ∇f + 2D(1 −α)q−1∇q · ∇f + D∆f

+ O(ε3/2)
(A.149)
= f + ε(Lf + 2D(1 −α)q−1∇q · ∇f) + O(ε3/2)
(A.150)
63


This gives us the following form for the α-regularised Laplacian:
Lαf = µ · ∇f + 2(1 −α)D∇q
q · ∇f + D∆f
(A.151)
We see that if one doesn’t fully regularise for the sampling density, then there will be another advection
term proportional to ∇q that is weighted by a factor of (1 −α). If one progressively increases α from 0
to 1, then the contribution of this additional term decreases. If one wants an exact reconstruction of the
underlying dynamics then one should always consider the α = 1 case; but if one’s data is highly noisy (many
outliers) then pushing the effective drift towards the core concentration of the data may be wise depending
on your ultimate goal. The α-normalised adjoint has an expansion analogous to the previous results given
in Theorem 3.2.
A.4
Discrete Operator Convergence
The final proof we provide completes the theory that underlies most kernel methods, and gives convergence
in probability of the discrete operators to the continuous operators. In what follows, we will use the Bernstein
inequality as given below:
Lemma A.7 (I.I.D. Bernstein Inequality). Let X1, X2, . . . , Xm be independent and identically distributed
zero-mean real-valued random variables, and suppose ∃a, b > 0 such that |Xi| ≤a and E[X2
i ] ≤b. Then for
any δ > 0:
P
 
1
m
m
X
i=1
Xi
 > δ
!
≤2 exp

−
1
2mδ2
b + 1
3aδ

(A.152)
Theorem A.6 (Discrete Operator Convergence). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold em-
bedded in Rn and with metric inherited from the standard Euclidean metric in ambient space.
Suppose
D = {xi}m
i=1 is a dataset of m independent samples from the sampling distribution q(x) which we assume
satisfies infx∈M q(x) =: cq > 0, i.e. supp(q) = M and q doesn’t decay to zero anywhere on M - this condi-
tion necessitates that M be bounded. Suppose Kε(x, y) is an Ordered Diffusion Kernel and Lε its associated
Laplacian, with the sampling density fully regularised away (α = 1), and suppose, after fixing an indexing
of D, Lm,ε ∈Rm×m is the discretisation of Lε onto D (i.e. [Lεf] ≈Lm,ε[f] =
1
m[Lε] · [f]). Then for any
bounded f ∈L2(M, q) ∩C3(M), i.e. ∃Cf > 0 such that supx∈M |f(x)| = Cf, and any δ > 0:
P
 ∥Lm,ε[f] −[Lεf]∥∞> δ

≤2m exp
 
−
1
2mεd/2+2δ2
Cf(CK + εd/2)(Cf + 1
3εδ)
!
(A.153)
where CK > 0 is a constant that depends on Kε and q and is independent of xi.
Proof. We will proceed rather directly, for any x ∈D we define Vx(y) = Pε(x, y)f(y), and Wx(y) =
Vx(y) −Ey∼q[Vx(y)] - it is clear that Ey∼q[Wx(y)] = 0. We recall that Pε(x, y) :=
Kε(x,y)
Z(x)q(y), where Z(x) =
R
M Kε(x, y)dy. Since Kε(x, y) = h(u(x, y)) ≤Ch exp(−u(x, y)/σ2) we know that Kε(x, y) is bounded from
above by Ch > 0; we also know that, due to the ε scaling in the defining of an ODK, Z(x) = εd/2m(x) where
m(x) is as in Theorem 3.1, let us assume that infx∈M m(x) = cm > 0 - this is a sort of non-degeneracy
condition. By combining these with the assumptions that |f(x)| ≤Cf and q(x) ≥cq, then we can deduce:
|Wx(y)| ≤|Vx(y)| + |Ey∼q[Vx(y)]| = |Pε(x, y)f(y)| +

Z
M
Pε(x, z)f(z)q(z)dz

(A.154)
≤
ChCf
εd/2cmcq
+ C2
f
Z
M
Kε(x, z)
Z(x)
dz =: ε−d/2CKCf + C2
f
(A.155)
where we have defined CK = Chc−1
m c−1
q . We can also deduce:
|Ey∼q[Wx(y)2]| ≤|Ey∼q[Vx(y)2]| + |Ey∼q[Vx(y)]2| =
Z
M
Pε(x, y)2f(y)2q(y)dy +
Z
M
Pε(x, y)f(y)q(y)dy

(A.156)
≤
CKC2
f
εd/2
Z
M
Kε(x, y)
Z(x)
dy + C2
f
Z
M
Kε(x, y)
Z(x)
dy
2
= ε−d/2CKC2
f + C2
f
(A.157)
64


We can now apply Bernstein’s inequality, as given in Lemma A.7, to any xi ∈D:
P



1
m
m
X
j=1
Wxi(xj)

> δ

= P



1
m
m
X
j=1
Pε(xi, xj)f(xj) −Ey∼q[Pε(xi, y)f(y)]

> δ


(A.158)
≤2 exp
 
−
1
2mεd/2δ2
C2
f(CK + εd/2) + 1
3Cf(CK + εd/2)δ
!
(A.159)
We note that if we added and subtracted f(xi) and replaced δ 7→εδ in the second expression, then all Pε
terms could be replaced by Lε terms; thus:
P



1
m
m
X
j=1
Lε(xi, xj)f(xj) −Lεf(xi)

> δ

≤2 exp
 
−
1
2mεd/2+2δ2
Cf(CK + εd/2)(Cf + 1
3εδ)
!
(A.160)
The first term within the modulus expression is equal to (Lm,ε[f])i and the second term equals [Lεf]i. The
L∞-norm across all i = 1, . . . , m will equal ∥Lm,ε[f] −[Lεf]∥∞= maxi=1,...,m |(Lm,ε[f])i −[Lεf]i|, by the
union bound inequality:
P
 ∥Lm,ε[f] −[Lεf]∥∞> δ

≤
m
X
i=1
P (|(Lm,ε[f])i −[Lεf]i| > δ)
(A.161)
≤2m exp
 
−
1
2mεd/2+2δ2
Cf(CK + εd/2)(Cf + 1
3εδ)
!
(A.162)
65


B
Supplementary Notes
B.1
Ordering Functions
In this supplementary note, we seek to clarify what is meant by an Ordering Function. It is important to say
that an ordering function, as we conceptualise it, is not really something that can be defined independently
based on some distinguished set of properties, and is more like a representation of some mathematical
ordering of elements (i.e. a notion of something being larger or smaller, or happening later or earlier, than
something else)
Orderings of mathematical spaces are studied in order theory, and many deep results come from this
field; however, there are many different axiomatic constructions to choose from when defining an ordering
([96, 54, 43]). The idea of an ordering function is not novel in principle, since ultimately what an ordering
function does is try to map the natural ordering of the real numbers onto some abstract mathematical
space; in the literature, concepts like our ordering function are referred to as the utility functions or utility
representations [91, 68, 31, 16]. We will give a discussion of how an ordering function fits within the more well-
studied field of representations reflexive and transitive quasi-orders, sometimes called pre-orders, although
we note that it may be more appropriate to consider a more specialised construction such as d-spaces [38],
which consider orderings defined by a set of directed paths, or streams [54], which considers a circulation
that associates a quasi-order to the open sets of a topological space, both of which generalise quasi-orders.
Definition B.1 (Quasi/Pre-Order). Let X be some set. A binary relation ≤: X × X →{0, 1} is called a
quasi-order if it satisfies the following two conditions:
i). (Reflexivity): ∀x ∈X, x ≤x
ii). (Transitivity): ∀x, y, z ∈X, (x ≤y) ∧(y ≤z) =⇒(x ≤z)
If, in addition, the quasi-order satisfies the following linearity (totality) condition, we call ≤a linear (total)
quasi-order (LQO):
iii). (Linearity): ∀x, y ∈X, (x ≤y) ∨(y ≤x)
Let ≤be a quasi-order: then if x ≤y or y ≤x, we say that x and y are comparable — a Linear
Quasi-Order (LQO) is thus a quasi-order where all elements of X are comparable; we can define a strict
quasi-order, <, as a restriction of ≤, through x < y
⇐⇒
x ≤y ∧y ≰x; we can define an equivalence
relation x ≃y ⇐⇒x ≤y ∧y ≤x, which we call (quasi-)equality; for two subsets U, V ⊂X, if for every
x ∈U and y ∈V we have x ≤y (x < y or x ≃y), then we write U ≤V (U < V or U ≃V ); for any A ⊂X
we can define the lower, equal and upper sets as:
L(A) = {x ∈X|∃y ∈A : x ≤y},
U(A) = {x ∈X|∃y ∈A : y ≤x},
E(A) = {x ∈X|∃y ∈A : x ≃y}
(B.1)
A quasi-order is called spacious if for every x, y ∈X such that x ≤y, then L(x) ⊆L(y) (if you are given
a strict quasi-order this condition would be cl(L(x)) ⊆L(y) and it is true that the strict restriction of a
quasi-order satisfying the former property, will also satisfy the latter property. A strict quasi-order is said
to be separable if for any x, y ∈X such that x < y, there will exist a p ∈X such that x < p < y, likewise
≤is separable if its strict restriction is separable; if X is a topological space that is itself separable, and
≤is continuous (see definition B.2 below) then < will be separable. Assume from now on that X is a
topological space, currently a quasi-order on X will be entirely independent of the topology on X, but we
may connect them with notions of continuity that mirror T1 and T2 (Hausdorff) spaces: effectively, if ≤
is lower-(upper-)semicontinuous then for all x, y ∈X such that x ≰y (y ≰x) there exists an open set of
U ⊂X containing a such that U ≰b (b ≰U); a result of this is that if ≤is lower (upper) semicontinuous
then its lower (upper) sets will be topologically closed. A quasi-order is called semicontinuous if it is both
upper- and lower-semicontinuous. A quasi-order is said to be continuous if:
Definition B.2. A quasi-order, ≤, of a topological space X, is said to be continuous if ∀x, y ∈X such that
x ≰y, there exists open neighbourhoods U and V of x and y, respectively, such that U ∩V = ∅and ∀u ∈U
and ∀v ∈V then u ≰v.
It is true that continuity implies semicontinuity, and indeed, if ≤is linear, semicontinuity and continuity
are equivalent [96]. For a continuous quasi-order, the lower and upper sets will be topologically closed, and
66


furthermore, the lower and upper sets of the strict restriction will be open; a continuous quasi-order will
have a closed graph in the product topology of X × X, whereas semicontinuity does not guarantee this. For
what follows, we will always assume that ≤is continuous.
The notion of an order we have built so far is very abstract and rather difficult to study and visualise, but
we realise that for any reasonable ordering we might consider we are effectively mapping the only canonical
ordering we have, that is the ordering of the real numbers, onto local regions of X. In other words, under
mild assumptions on X and ≤, we have for every x ∈X a neighbourhood U of x and an order-preserving (i.e.
strictly increasing/isotone) map f : U →R; the question becomes when will these local functions be nice (i.e.
continuous) and can we glue these local f’s together to form a global continuous function f : (X, ≤) →(R, ≤)
that satisfies:
∀x, y ∈X : x < y =⇒f(x) < f(y)
(B.2)
where we must use the strict relation, as otherwise any constant f would be satisfactory. In the literature,
these functions are referred to as utility functions, and more broadly they form a utility representation of
quasi-ordered topological spaces.20 We note that in the representation given in equation (B.2), f does not
entirely determine/characterise the ordering since the implication only goes one way; however, generalising
this to an if and only if statement would immediately imply that ≤is linear, which is a strong condi-
tion. This motivated the development of so-called multi-utility representations of quasi-orders, in which
we take a (potentially uncountable) family of functions F = {fi}i∈I such that ∀x, y ∈X : x ≤y
=⇒
(f(x) ≤f(y) for all f ∈F ). Thus, the family F entirely characterises the ordering, which feels more useful;
there is still the issue of existence that we tackle in the following proposition:
Proposition B.1. Let (X, ≤) be a continuous quasi-ordered topological space. The following will hold:
(i). If the associated strict quasi-order, <, is separable and spacious, then there exists a continuous utility
function, f : X →R, such that x ≤y =⇒f(x) ≤f(y), for (X, ≤).
(ii). If the associated strict quasi-order, <, is separable and spacious, then there exists a continuous utility
function, f : X →R, such that x ≤y ⇐⇒f(x) ≤f(y) if and only if ≤is linear.
(iii). If X is a locally-compact Hausdorff space that is also σ-compact,21 then there always exists a continuous
multi-utility representation of (X, ≤). If in addition X is second-countable ( ⇐⇒C(X) is separable),
then this representation can be taken to be countable.
Proof. (i) This is a known result of Peleg (Theorem 3.1 of [68]) that shows for a separable and spacious,
continuous strict quasi-order, <, there will exist a continuous utility function, f : X →R, in the form
x < y =⇒f(x) < f(y). If we first take the quotient of X by the equality relation, ≃, then we can define
the relation ⪯, on X/ ≃through: [x] ⪯[y] ⇐⇒∃˜x ∈[x], ˜y ∈[y] : ˜x ≤˜y. This relation will be well-defined,
reflexive and transitive and thus a quasi-order; furthermore, if < is separable and spacious, so too will ≺.
Therefore by the Theorem of Peleg, there will exist ˜f : (X/ ≃) →R such that [x] ≺[y] =⇒˜f([x]) < ˜f([y])
that is constant on the equal sets of (X, ≤) (i.e. if x ≃y then f([x]) = f([y])). Thus, by properties of
quotient spaces, there will be a continuous function f : X →R such that x < y
=⇒
f(x) < f(y) and
x ≃y =⇒f(x) = f(y).
(ii) The forward implication is trivial, and (i) shows that there exists a continuous f such that x < y =⇒
f(x) < f(y); if x ≃y, then f(x) = f(y), if x < y then f(x) < f(y), and if y < x f(y) < f(x), thus f entirely
characterises ≤and by linearity we are done.
(iii) This is a known result and derives from a result of Evren & Ok (see Theorem 1 of [31]), which states
the existence of a continuous multi-utility representation. The countability of this representation comes from
locally compact Hausdorff spaces that are also σ-compact and second-countable, having a countable basis
that makes C(X) separable.
There are several takeaways here: first, utility representations are abundant for nice quasi-orders (contin-
uous, separable and spacious) defined on nice topological spaces (effectively, we want X to be metrisable, and
we note that second-countable, locally compact Hausdorff spaces that are σ-compact are always metrisable).
20More precisely, this is a Richter-Peleg representation.
21A topological space X is Hausdorff if any two points are jointly distinguished by disjoint open sets; X is locally compact if
around every point there exists an open set whose closure is compact; a locally compact space is σ-compact if it can be written
as a countable union of these compact sets.
67


Thus, if we are focused on continuous linear quasi-orders, we may as well consider the function l : X →R,
that generates the LQO, ≤l, through:
x ≤l y ⇐⇒l(x) ≤l(y)
(B.3)
as being the fundamental object of study, and thus we call this an ordering function (although, as we
mentioned at the beginning, it doesn’t seem correct to define the ordering function outright); we could also
view the multiple-Ordered Diffusion Kernels (mODKs) of section 3.1.1 as being analogous to multi-utility
representations. If we now restrict ourselves to defining ordering functions on a d-dimensional topological
manifold, i.e. l : M →R, then we see that if dlx̸ = 0 for any x in an open set U ⊂M, then the level sets of l
form a codimension-one foliation of U, i.e. we have sliced U along the level sets of l, which are equivalently
the equal sets of the order ≤l, and this slicing is such that each level set is a (d−1)-dimensional submanifold.
We can then view the second term of the ODK:
Kε(x, y) = h
∥y −x∥2
ερ(x)2
+ (l(y) −l(x) −ετ(x)κ(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2
−(l(y) −l(x))2
ερ(x)2κ(x)2

(B.4)
as an advection across the leaves of the foliation, and the first term as a diffusion applied after this initial
advection.
By Theorem 3.1, we see that the first-order term of the expansion of Kε is proportional to
∇l, thus, (spacious and separable) continuous linear quasi-orders (whose equal sets are sufficiently smooth)
defined on differentiable manifolds is entirely characterised by a gradient flow; we could say that the order
is generated by this flow. Thus these C2(M) ordering functions characterise all sufficiently smooth linear
quasi-orders; this motivates us to think of an ordering as some representation of a vector field, and thus
the existence of a suitable ordering function depends on some notion of integrability of this vector field.
Furthermore, if we allow for our vector fields to be more general than gradient-flows, then statement (ii) in
proposition B.1, gives us another characterisation relation (an if and only if statement) between orderings
and multi-utility representations, thus taking an mODK with a finite (k = min(2d, n)) number of ordering
functions would allow us to represent arbitrary vector-field proportional to Pk
i=1 τi(x)∇li(x), thus allowing
us to generalise beyond (sufficiently smooth) linear quasi-orders to (sufficient smooth) non-linear (partial)
quasi-orders.
However, if we are now trying to view an ordering that is both nice and as generally applicable as possible,
then we notice that (global) transitivity limits us from representing cyclic orders. As an example, suppose
we wished to order the hour hand of a clock: clearly 1 < 2, but we also have that 2 < 3, and 3 < 4, and so
on, until we have 12 < 1; by transitivity, this implies 2 < 1 and thus our ordering is contradictory. To order
the clock, or more generally to order cyclic domains, we need to relax the assumption of transitivity; there
have been several formulations of such an idea of locally ordered topological spaces, these include: a very
intuitive formulation in terms of open sets through local partial orders, whereby partial we mean that ≤is
also antisymmetric22, such a space is called a local pospace (see [33] for more details); a simple removal of
transitivity, where ≤is simply reflexive and its graph, {(x, y) ∈X ×X : x ≤y}, is closed with respect to the
product topology, we call such spaces weakly ordered topological spaces (or wospaces); a characterisation of
an ordering based on a set of distinguished paths, dX = {γ : I →X}, that satisfies all constant path are in
dX, dX is closed under reparametisation of the interval I by weakly increasing functions, and dX is closed
under concaternation of consecutive paths in dX, thus we can define a relation x ≤y if there is a path in dX
originating at x and ending at y, we call such spaces d-spaces (see [38] for more details); a characterisation
of an ordering based on a circulation that is effectively a pre-sheaf, i.e. we can restrict the circulation to a
preorder on any open set, we call such an ordering a stream (see [54] for more details).
All of the above methods (other than weakly ordered spaces) will generalise easily to cyclic orders; the
study of local pospaces naturally includes the study of global pospaces (which is similar to the discussion
we give above), while d-spaces and streams naturally can represent any continuous quasi-ordered topological
space — therefore, these last two constructions are most aligned with the generalisation we seek to make.
Just as the discussion of continuous quasi-orders defined on a d-dimensional manifold led to a discussion of
vector fields and integrability, so too will the notion of a local continuous quasi-order lead to a discussion of
locally defined vector fields and their local integrability. Furthermore, since if our construction allows us to
22Where antisymmetry is taken to mean ∀x, y ∈X if x ≤y ∧y ≤x =⇒x = y where equality is of elements not of orders,
i.e. not as with ≃as we have had with quasi-orders.
68


say that a subset U ⊂X has a local ordering ≤U, then any restriction of this ordering to V ⊂U will be a
local ordering on V , which fits nicely into the description of sheafs and thus functors between categories, local
orderings are often studied in this light; intrestingly, it was proven by Haucourt that streams and d-spaces
are almost isomorphic in a category theoretic sense [43].
In this paper we will not generalise an ordering function (or utility representation) to these more general
notions of an ordering, but will rather define a simple construction — that mirrors the definition of local
pospaces given in [33] but differs in some important ways — that fits naturally within the framework of a
local ordering function, l(x, y), as introduced in section 3.1.
We define a Locally Linear Quasi-Ordered Topological Space (LLQOTS) as follows:
Definition B.3 (LLQOTS). A Locally Linear Quasi-Ordered Topological Space (LLQOTS) is a pair (X, OX),
where X is a topological space and OX = {(U, ≤U)} is called the order set of X, and is composed of open
linearly ordered subsets of X satisfying the following properties:
1). Each U ∈OX is open, connected and has compact closure.
2). Every ≤U is a reflexive, transitive and linear binary relation on U that is continuous and separable
with respect to the subspace topology.
3). There is no element U ∈OX that is strictly contained in another.
4). For every (U, ≤U), (V, ≤V ) ∈OX, the orderings will agree on their intersection.
5). There are no extremal (maximal or minimal) elements in any (U, ≤U) ∈OX.
Let us denote by Xr = S
U∈OX U the regular set of the order (or the regularly ordered set), and let Xc = X\Xr
be the critical set of the order. If cl(X) = cl(Xr), then we say the local ordering is complete; if, in addition,
cl(X) = S
U∈OX cl(U), we say that OX is locally complete.
We note that if OX is complete and (Xr, ≤Xr) ∈OX, then by assumption (4) we will have returned
to the case of continuous LQOs on X. This construction is very similar to how local pospaces are defined,
except we do not require partiality and we do not assume that S
U∈OX U = X — this relaxation is important
when introducing local ordering functions (which we could reasonably call local utility-representations). To
help our intuition we could imagine that we are somewhere on Earth looking out into the distance, our eyes
will only allow us to see so far before the curvature of earth breaks our line of sight, or a mountain blocks
the view of something behind it; the locally ordered neighbourhoods encode that we can only see so far, and
the peaks of mountains would be contained in the closures of these neighbourhoods.
We do not develop the theory of LLQOTs fully in this paper as it does not seem suitable, but we will
make the following general claims: the restriction to local orderings allows us to represent cyclic orders (this
can be seen in the numerical example given in section 4.1); formalising the idea of a maximal extension23 of
a connected ordered set will allow us to study the topology of X through the criticalities (the parts we have
to cut out in order to define an LQO) of the ordering, and furthermore, the set of all maximal extensions
of a set can itself be ordered;24 the elements of X that are not contained in S
U∈OX U will conveniently
be the local maximal and minimal elements of the local order, which as we recall from the discussion of
criticalities of the ordering function (i.e. x ∈M such that ∇l(x) = 0), will allow us to assume the local
ordering functions form proper foliations of each U ∈OX, thus making it easier to discuss and characterise
a local ordering function.
By the assumption (2) above and statement (ii) in proposition B.1, we can associate a continuous function
fU to every (U, ≤U) ∈OX, and by assumption (1) and (5) we know that fU does not have any extremal
values in U, but does take both a maximal and minimal value on ∂U (the boundary of U, defined as ∂U =
cl(U) \ int(U)), since these utility representations are invariant under composition with strictly increasing
functions (i.e. if φ : fU(U) →R is strictly increasing then φ ◦fU is also a utility function), we can assume
that fU : U →I = (0, 1). Assumption (4) implies for every (U, ≤U), (V, ≤V ) ∈OX there exists a strictly
increasing continuous bijection φV
U : fU(U ∩V ) →fV (U ∩V ) such that fV = φV
U ◦fU.
Assume now that X is Hausdorff and OX is locally complete, i.e. every point x is in the closure of at
least one of the ordered sets. We seem to construct a local ordering function (local utility-representation),
23An extension, (W, ≤W ), over OX is any open connected ordered subset of X, s.t. W is covered by sets in OX, and ≤W
agrees with ≤U on W ∩U for any U ∈OX. A maximal extension is an extension that is not strictly contained in any other
extension.
24Furthermore, if we formalise a notion of path-extensions it is likely possible to make a direct connection to d-spaces, as
described in [38].
69


f(x, y), that satisfies x ≤Ux y
⇐⇒
f(x, y) ≥0, where Ux is some open neighbourhood of x. Following
from the previous discussion, we see that the only difficulty is defining the open sets Ux for elements of Mc;
suppose x ∈∂U for some U ∈OX is not contained in any other element of OX, then this can break down
in two distinct situations: the closure (with sequences) of the order, ≤U on cl(U), forms a cyclic ordering;
there is another (V, ≤V ) ∈OX such that x ∈∂V and the closure of the ordering ≤U does not agree with
the closure of the ordering ≤V . In the latter case we can either define the set Ux = (U ∪V ) ∪(∂U ∩∂V )
and allow for fx(y) := f(x, y) to be discontinuous or we must assume the stronger version of assumption (4)
that being the transverse closure by sequences of any (U, ≤U), (V, ≤V ) ∈OX must agree on intersection —
we could call this a transversly closed local ordering.
Resolving the cyclic order is more technical: for this to occur x must be both a maximal and minimal
element of U (since cl(U) is compact), thus we must take an equal set, E, in U that is strictly less (equivalently
strictly greater) than x, letting Ex = [x] ∩U denote the equal set of x in the closure of U, we can and define
Ux = (U ∪Ex)\E, this will be an open subset of X that is linearly orderable given OX. The difficulty comes
from choosing which E to cut out and is effectively equivalent to choosing which point on a circle to cut out
to make S1 \ {p} ∼= (0, 1), to do this unambiguously you would need, at least, that X be metrisable so that
you can take E such that it is in the midpoint of U. For all other points of closure we can construct Ux as
follows: if x ∈∂X, then simply taking Ux = cl(U) is satisfactory (since this will be open in the topology
of X); if x is a transverse or extremal point of closure, we could take either Ux = (U ∪V ) ∪(∂U ∩∂V ), or
Ux = int(U ↑∪V ↓) where U ↑is the upward closure (closure in terms of increasing sequences) and V ↓is the
downward closure (closure in terms of decreasing sequences), respectively.
Therefore, if X is Hausdorff, and OX is locally complete and transversely closed, then for every x ∈X
we can construct an open set Ux containing x such that OX implies a continuous LQO on Ux. By statement
(ii) of proposition B.1 there will exist a continuous fx for every such neighbourhood; thus on the domain
D = F
x∈X Ux, we can construct a local ordering function as f : D →R : (x, y) 7→fx(y) and which satisfies
x ≤Ux y ⇐⇒f(x, y) ≥0. We note that the D that we construct is not necessarily the best (i.e. largest)
domain possible; to construct a maximal domain for f we would need each Ux to be the maximal extension
over OX containing x; since we do not formally introduce this idea in this paper, we will end that discussion
here. In the above discussion, we have proven the following proposition:
Proposition B.2. Let X be a Hausdorff topological space, and let OX be a locally complete and trans-
versely closed continuous local linear quasi-order. Then there always exists a local utility-representation,
f : Dom(f) →R of OX, where Dom(f) = F
x∈X Ux for open neighbourhoods Ux of x satisfying for any
x ∈X and y ∈Ux, x ≤Ux y
⇐⇒
f(x, y) ≥0. If, in addition, X is metrisable (e.g. locally compact,
second-countable, and σ-compact) and the maximal extensions of OX are not arbitrarily small, then each Ux
can be chosen to be not arbitrarily small.
Proof. The first statement has been shown by construction in the previous discussion. If X is metrisable
then it is homeomorphic to a metric space (M, d), let us denote this homeomorphism as ϕ : (X, τ) →(M, d).
Therefore, not arbitrarily small means there is a uniform lower bound on the diameter of the sets ϕ(Ux) ⊂M
with respect to d. As mentioned, we can construct Ux to be a maximal extension over OX containing x, and
by assumption of the proposition, the maximal extensions will not be arbitrarily small, so we are done.
A local ordering function allows us to unify Richter-Peleg utility functions for continuous LQOs, and
multi-utility representations for non-linear (incomplete) quasi-orders:
Utility Function:
f(x, y) = f(y) −f(x)
(B.5)
Multi-Utility Representations:
f(x, y) = inf
i∈I [fi(y) −fi(x)]
(B.6)
where f : X →R is a Richter-Peleg utility representation, and {fi}i∈I is a multi-utility representation.
Trivially in both cases f(x, x) = 0 and by the definition of the utility representations, we will have x ≤
y ⇐⇒f(x, y) ≥0. Furthermore, can represent the more complex notion of continuous LLQOs and even
local pospaces naturally within the local ordering function.
If we restrict ourselves to smooth d-dimensional Riemannian manifolds, which we denote by M, then
we can frame a local ordering function in terms of vector fields again. We note that it is true that any
arbitrary smooth vector field b : M →TM can be written as b(x) = ∇lx(x) for some smooth scalar function
70


lx : M →R. We can see this by simply writing l(x, y) = gx(exp−1
x (y), b(x)) where expx : ˜U →U where
U is an open neighbourhood of x, and ˜U is an open ball of radius inj(x) centred at the origin of Rd; the
exponential map defines the normal coordinates about x and in these normal coordinates gx = Id and
therefore l(x, y) = yibi(x), it is then trivial true that ∇lx(x) = b(x). The assumption of bounded geometry
simply allows us to bound the injectivity radius away from zero, i.e. there exists some c > 0 such that
infx∈M inj(x) = c; thus, ˜l : M × B(0, c) →R : (x, u) →l(x, expx(u)) is a well-defined smooth function.
The condition x ≤y ⇐⇒l(x, y) ≥0 is equivalent to y −x being in the same half-space as b(x), which is
simply a measure of directionality - exactly as we desire for our ordering function to imply. Furthermore, if
ω : M →T ∗M was the dual covector field of b : M →TM, then by Frobenius’ Theorem, we know that
the kernel of ω will generate a foliation if and only if ω ∧dω = 0. This equivalence allows us to construct
an ordering function from any codimension-one transversally orientable25 foliation as opposed to a foliation
defined from an ordering.
Assume that OM is locally complete, and let lU be an ordering function for some U ∈OM, then we will
have an atlas of codimension-one foliated charts that cover Mr and whose foliations agree on their inter-
sections, thus Mr admits a global codimension-one foliation, and this is generated by a nowhere vanishing
1-form ω satisfying ωU = hUdfU — this follows from the fact that transversal orientability being immediate
from the definition of an LLQOTS. The scalar functions hU are constructed such that hU/hV = DφV
U(fU)
where φV
U : lU(U ∩V ) →lV (U ∩V ) are the continuous strictly increasing functions that we us to represent
the agreement of the order on a LLQOTS,26 with this condition arising from:
ωU∩V = hUdfU = hV dfV = hV DφV
U(fU)dfU =⇒hU
hV
= DφV
U(fU) > 0
(B.7)
We can construct each hU as follows: take a partition of unity {ρU}U∈OM on a subcover V of OM, for
every U ∈OM define gU = P
V ∈V ρV λV
U, where λV
U = log DφV
U(lU). Since φW
U = φW
V ◦φV
U we will have
λW
U = λV
U +λW
V and thus gU −gV = P ρW (λW
U −λW
V ) = λy
x and thus hU := exp(gU) we will have hU/hV = φV
U.
Therefore, given a locally complete LLQOTS, the associated local ordering function will be equivalent to
l(x, y) = ω(x)(exp−1
x (y)), thus connecting the structures of vector fields, foliations and locally linear quasi-
orders, and representing them all with a local ordering function.
To summarise, if M is a smooth d-dimensional Riemannian manifold, and OM is an order set that is
locally complete and transversely closed, then the regular set will admit a codimension-one foliation with
leaves being the equal contours of OM. Furthermore, OM being locally complete implies Mc ⊆∂Mr which
can be at most a (d −1)-dimensional submanifold which means volg(Mc) = 0, i.e. almost everything is
foliated. By proposition B.2 there will always exist a local ordering function, l(x, y), and by the previous
discussion there will exist a smooth 1-form, ω : M →T ∗M such that l(x, y) = ω(x)(exp−1
x (y)) that satisfies
ω̸ = 0 and ω ∧dω = 0 on Mr. Although we resisted providing a definition of an ordering function, if we
were forced to give one, it would be:
Definition B.4 (Ordering Functions). Let M be a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold with bounded ge-
ometry, and let ω : M →T ∗M be a C2 1-form satisfying ω ∧dω = 0 and supp(ω) := cl({x ∈M : ω(x)̸ =
0}) = M. Then we call the function l : Dom(l) →R : (x, y) 7→ω(x)(exp−1
x (y)) a local ordering function,
where Dom(l) = F
x∈M Ux is such that for any x ∈M the exponential map, exp−1
x , is a diffeomorphism on
Ux. If, in addition, there exists a scalar function ˜l ∈C2(M) such that l(x, y) = ˜l(y) −˜l(x) (equivalently
ω = d˜l) then we call ˜l(x) a global ordering function.
From this definition, we know that a local ordering function defines transversally orientable codimension-
one foliations almost everywhere, i.e. the leaves of the foliation have a well-defined normal vector.27 Our
restriction of the domain ensures that l(x, y) is well-defined, and the assumption of bounded geometry ensures
this domain is not arbitrarily small, and trivially we have that l(x, x) = ω(x)(0) = 0 for every x ∈M. We
also make the important practical note that the restriction of M to be such that it admits a transversely
orientable codimension-one foliation is not at all limiting since we are assuming the manifold is generated
by some stochastic process, i.e. there really will be a well-defined normal vector for every leaf.
25A codimension-one foliation is said to be transversally orientable if the normal vector to the leaves can be chosen to have
a globally consistent unit normal vector field.
26This condition relates back to our discussion about the continuity of a local ordering function in the first argument given
in section 3.1.
27We know this because the foliation is represented by a nowhere-vanishing 1-form.
71


B.2
Estimating ∥∇l(x)∥on Discrete Samples
In our discussion of the form of the order regularisation function κ(x), we proposed setting κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥
to make ODK agnostic to the scale of l(x). In practice, it is unlikely that you will have an analytic expression
for l(x), so one must compute ∥∇l(x)∥numerically from evaluations of l(x) on the data D. There are many
methods that one could use towards this end, but we find that one in particular feels very canonical given
our assumption that the data clusters on or near an d-dimensional Riemannian submanifold M of Rn. Let
us first set up the problem: the gradient of a function f : Rn →R at a point x ∈Rn, denoted ∇f(x), is the
unique vector satisfying:
lim
y→x
f(y) −f(x) −∇f(x)T (y −x)
∥y −x∥
= 0
(B.8)
In other words, ∇f(x) defines the best possible linear approximation of f around x. For some y ∈B(x, η(x)),
where η(x) is a sufficiently small radius such that this linear approximation is reasonable, we can ignore the
limit in equation (B.8) and rearrange to find:
f(y) = f(x) + ∇f(x)T (y −x)
(B.9)
Let D = {xi}m
i=1 ⊂Rn be a finite sample of points on M, for every i = 1, . . . , m, let Ni = (B(xi, ηi)∩D)\{xi},
where again ηi is some sufficiently small radius. Then we can see that equation (B.9) defines a linear regression
problem; more precisely, it defines the problem δif = XT
i βi, where βi denotes our approximation to ∇f(xi),
and (δif)j = f(xj) −f(xi) and (Xi):,j = xj −xi, for xj ∈Ni — we are assuming for convenience that these
samples are indexed from j = 1, . . . , |Ni| in Ni. If our goal is to minimise the squared residuals, i.e. we wish
to minimise R2(βi) = ∥δif −XT
i βi∥2, then this is a least squares problem and if |Ni| ≫1 will have a unique
solution given by:
βi = (XiXT
i )−1Xiδif
(B.10)
However, if |Ni| < n — which would often be the case if we are choosing a small neighbourhood Ni of xi
and n ≫1 — then the system will be underdetermined and there will be infinitely many solutions that
minimise the squared residuals. To break this tie, the usual method is to take the solution that minimises
R2(βi) + ∥βi∥2, which will select the solution of smallest magnitude that minimises R2(βi). This can also be
expressed exactly through [61]:
βi = Xi(XT
i Xi)−1δif
(B.11)
It turns out that both of these expressions are equivalent if written in terms of components of the Singular
Value Decomposition (SVD) of XT
i = UiSiV T
i , where Ui ∈R|Ni|×|Ni| and Vi ∈Rn×n are unitary matrices
(i.e. V −1 = V T ), and Si ∈R|Ni|×n with positive values along the diagonal. In this case, our solution can be
expressed as:
βi = ViS−1
i
U T
i δif
(B.12)
This discussion justifies solving for the gradient by setting up a regression problem if the function f is
defined in Rn, but in our setup, the ordering function, l : M →R is imagined to be be defined on a d-
dimensional Riemannian manifold M embedded in Rn, with n ≫d, and thus we are including far too many
dimensions in equation (B.12) which can only be adding errors since the l(x) does not vary in these directions.
Furthermore, if n ≫1, the Euclidean metric itself begins to become less informative as the concentration
of measure phenomenon starts to take effect [56]. Given this consideration, the most principled next step
would be to try and restrict our regression problem to the tangent space TxM in which ∇l(x) actually lives;
furthermore, we know that TM is a rank-d subbundle of TRn and thus at at xi ∈D we need to restrict to a
d-dimensional affine space centred about xi. This is exactly the sort of problem that Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) is designed to solve, and thus, in what follows, we will apply PCA locally on every difference
matrix Xi for i = 1, . . . , m, to construct an approximation of the tangent bundle on M. This method is
referred to as local-PCA (for obvious reasons) and is familiar to many people working in the field of manifold
learning, as it is one of the simplest constructive methods to access the tangent spaces of a manifold [83].
Before proceeding, we remark that our restriction to the neighbourhood Ni needs to include enough points
to resolve the function locally, but not so many points that the linear approximation of βi to δil breaks down,
and also must not be so large that the curvature of the manifold invalidates using a linear approximation
to the tangent space. The determination of these neighbourhoods is either done by setting ηi ≡η to be
72


constant, as is done by Singer & Wu in [83], and which allows for some cleaner theoretical results; or by
setting ηi = ∥xi −xk
i ∥where xk
i is the kth nearest neighbour to xi not including xi, which uniformises our
neighbourhoods (i.e. |Ni| ≡k) and thus gives each estimate the same chance to fail or succeed. If the data
is very inhomogeneously sampled, then choosing the latter parameterisation is essentially necessary, and the
burden will then fall on how large you allow your neighbourhood to be; we have found that for manifolds of
relatively low dimensions k ∈[10, 30] often produces good results. We also note that it is standard to centre
Xi before applying PCA, but since we are only interested in the projection, we skip this step.
It is important to recall that we do not a priori assume we know the value of the intrinsic dimensionality
d. We could now employ one of the many intrinsic dimensionality estimation methods in the literature (see,
for example, [44, 37, 46, 32, 1, 26]), but instead we will keep within the domains of PCA and define a local
dimensionality di at every xi ∈D which will equal the minimum number of dimensions required to explain
a preset proportion of the variance in our neighbourhood Ni. This is equivalent to choosing some γ ∈(0, 1)
and defining:
di = min
(
k ∈{1, . . . , |Ni| :
Pk
j=1 σ2
j
P|Ni|
j=1 σ2
j
> γ
)
(B.13)
where {σj}|Ni|
j=1 are the singular values of Xi, i.e. the diagonal elements of Si.28 It would be most rigorous
to now define:
ˆd = median{di}m
i=1
(B.14)
so that we have a uniform estimate of the intrinsic dimensionality across the manifold; however, in practice
we do not see much benefit to our regression problem from making such a restriction, so we often approximate
TxiM with respect to each di. Now we are ready to apply PCA on each difference matrix Xi to form the
rank-di projection ˜Xi ∈Rdi×|Ni|, whose span determines our approximation to the tangent space. More
precisely, we compute the SVD of XT
i = UiSiV T
i , and then construct ˜Xi = ˜V T
i Xi = ˜SiU T
i as the projection
onto the first di principal components, where ˜Vi = (Vi):,1:di, ˜Si = (Si)1:di,:.29 Finally, from equation (B.12)
we define our estimate to be:
ˆ∇l(xi) := ˜S−1
i
U T
i δil
(B.15)
Define Gi := ˜S−1
i
˜U T
i , then ∥∇l(xi)∥2 ≈δilT GT
i Giδil. It is exactly these Gi that we denoted as Greg
i
in the
gradient regularisation of section 4.3, equation (102).
There are other gradient estimation methods that we could apply — most notably, a finite-difference
scheme tailored to non-uniform grids — but we believe that local-PCA is the most principled approach given
our assumptions about the data. Furthermore, while testing different schemes, we found that local-PCA was
the most reliable on inhomogeneously sampled data.
B.3
Heuristic Parameterisations of ODK
In this appendix, we will briefly discuss heuristic parametrisations that one might use for ODKs; we should
view these as data-adaptive parameterisations that are not related to the underlying dynamics that generated
the data but only seek to fit ODKs effectively to the data. It is worth noting that all of these heuristics will
have tangible drawbacks, and some may not work at all on certain datasets; it is important to tune — or
design new — heuristics based on the realities of the data you are studying. In what follows, D = {xi}m
i=1 ⊂
Rn will be our data, which we assume clusters around a d-dimensional submanifold, M, of Rn.
B.3.1
Geodesic Construction of an Ordering Function
We will begin by discussing the geodesic construction of the ordering function that we have mentioned several
times in the main text. First, we construct a symmetric (undirected) neighbourhood graph G = (V, E) where
a fixed indexing of our data forms the vertex set, V; and E is our edge set, i.e. i →j
⇐⇒
(i, j) ∈E,
and where i →j reads i connects to j; and we note that the property of being symmetric is equivalent to
G being undirected. It is not particularly important which graph construction method you use to construct
your graph so long as it satisfies the following three properties:
28We usually set γ = 0.9, as was done in [83], and found it suitable in almost all cases.
29Recall that the principal components are matrices are the columns of Q in the eigendecomposition XXT = QΛQ−1, where
symmetry implies Q−1 = QT ; and if XT = USV T then XXT = V S2V T , thus Q = V .
73


1). G is symmetric: ∀i, j ∈V such that (i, j) ∈E, then we must also have (j, i) ∈E;
2). G is connected: ∀i, j ∈V there exist vertices i0, i1, . . . , ik ∈V such that i0 = i and ik = j and
(il, il+1) ∈E for all l = 0, 1, . . . , k −1;
3). G is a neighbourhood graph: there exists some r > 0, that is sufficiently small with respect to the
maximum length scale of D (i.e. r ≪maxi,j∈V∥xi−xj∥), such that ∀i ∈V, we have maxj∈Ni d(xi, xj) <
r, where Ni = {j ∈V : (i, j) ∈E} are the descendants of i, and d : D × D →R is some distance metric.
As a disclaimer, we have invented the definition of a neighbourhood graph ourselves purely for convenience;
but we hope that it is clear that we are simply requiring that G encodes neighbourhood structure that is
consistent with the neighbourhood structure of the underlying manifold; and thus doesn’t allow long-distance
connections. A convenient method to represent such graphs is to use a distance threshold function f(i, j)
that defines the edge set through (i, j) ∈E ⇐⇒d(xi, xj) < f(i, j). The most common graph is a k-Nearest
Neighbours (kNN) graph where f(i, j) = ∥xi −xk
i ∥, where xk
i denotes the kth nearest neighbour to xi (not
including xi itself), but we notice that f(i, j)̸ = f(j, i) so this graph is not necessarily connected; we could
then consider the following two variations: the kNN-AND graph f(i, j) = min(∥xi −xk
i ∥, ∥xj −xk
j ∥), or the
kNN-OR graph f(i, j) = max(∥xi −xk
i ∥, ∥xj −xk
j ∥). Our personal preference is to use the Continuous-kNN
(CkNN) graph, introduced by Berry & Sauer in [13], which sets f(i, j) = δ
q
∥xi −xk
i ∥· ∥xj −xk
j ∥for some
sensitivity δ > 0; the CkNN graph has much more stable geometric properties as the dataset size increases,
and on inhomogeneously sampled data it is easier to construct a connected CkNN graph for a modest value
of k.
After one has constructed a graph, G, and given that we know a distribution, p0(x), on the initial states,
then we can construct the ordering function as:
l(xj) =
X
i∈supp(p0)
¯p0(xi) min
P ∈Pij
|P |−1
X
k=0
∥xik −xik+1∥
(B.16)
where ¯p0(xi) = p0(xi)/ P
j∈V p0(xj) and Pij = Sm
k=0{(i0, i1, . . . , ik) ∈Vk+1 : i0 = i ∧ik = j} is the set of all
possible paths originating at i and terminating at j. If we ¯p0(x) = ei0 for some i0 ∈V (i.e. p0(x) = δ(x−xi0)),
then the outer sum would disappear and equation (B.16) would be the standard shortest path length formula
on a graph, denoted as dG(i0, j); otherwise, we are computing the average of dG(i, j) over i. For symmetric
and connected graphs, the shortest path will always exist and be well defined, and if our discrete graph
is a neighbourhood graph, the shortest path will asymptotically approximate the geodesic distance on M.
In practice, if |supp(p0)| ≪m, you should use Dijkstra’s Algorithm [27] to compute the shortest path;
otherwise, or if at some future point you may need a matrix of pairwise geodesic distances, then you should
use the Floyd-Warshall algorithm [35, 97].
The geodesic construction of the ordering function should yield ∥∇l(x)∥≡1, so in theory there is no
need to estimate the scale of the ordering. However, in practice, inhomogeneities in in the sampling can case
the effective local scales to vary and thus one still might wish to compute κ(x) = ∥∇l(x)∥; in this case, and
if one has used a different construction of the ordering, we refer the reader to Appendix B.2 for a detailed
discussion of how we may approximate this quantity.
B.3.2
Fundamental Constraints on ODKs Parameters
We will begin by discussing ε, which in some sense is the most difficult parameter to choose.
We will
not review all relevant literature in this field, only what we consider important to mention, and we refer
interested readers to the following works [72, 67, 81, 77]. In the classical literature, a bandwidth is denoted
as h, but to avoid confusion with our kernel function, let us denote it as ¯h. For a symmetric Diffusion Maps
kernel of the form h

∥y−x∥2
ε

, ¯h = ε must act simultaneously as a fixed bandwidth (fitting the kernel to
the data) and as the asymptotic variable which we wish to take to zero. Let ¯hmin(i) be the smallest value
of the bandwidth such that the kernel Kε(xi, ·) would not be degenerate (we will clarify this later), then
for a Diffusion Maps kernel, we would choose ε∗= maxi=1,...,m ¯hmin(i) which would be the smallest epsilon
which guarantees that the kernel is non-degenerate everywhere. If we generalise to the left formulation of a
variable bandwidth, i.e. kernels of the form h

∥y−x∥2
ερ(x)2

, then the same discussion applies and we will have
74


ε∗ρ∗(xi)2 = ¯hmin(i), so we need to compute some heuristic length scale Li, for every xi ∈D, such that ∃c > 0
such that Li ≈c−1/2¯hmin(i)1/2, then setting ρ∗(xi) = Li implies ε∗= c is our optimal parametrisation, but
since our heuristic estimate of Li will not satisfy the proportionality relation exactly, in reality we would
still need ε∗= maxi=1,...,m ¯hmin(xi)/L2
i . When we make the connection to the underlying stochastic process,
as we do often in the main text, we add an additional constraint for ε, in that it must also be small
enough such that, relative to the underlying dynamics, the short time-step approximation of a Gaussian
transition operator is valid; this constraint is then equivalent to choosing a small increment dt such that
R T
0 pt(x)dt ≈PS
s=1 ps·dt(x)dt, where each pt(x) is a time-marginal of the underlying process, and S ≈T/dt.
The error in this approximation is O(dtT supt∈[0,T ] ∂tpt); let E(x) denote the error of this approximation,
substitution ε for dt, we know that:
E(x) =

Z T
0
pt(x)dt −
S
X
s=1
ps·ε(x)ε
 ≤εT
2
sup
t∈[0,T ]
|∂tpt| =⇒∥E∥∞≤εT
2
sup
t∈[0,T ]
∥L∗pt∥∞
(B.17)
where in the first inequality you use the mean value theorem and the fact that the integral of a linear
function is the area of a triangle, and the inequality for the supremum norm of the error is immediate after
commuting the suprema in time and space. The supremum on the right-hand side of the finally inequality
in equation (B.17) depends on the underlying dynamics, and thus if the dynamics are highly irregular, our
approximation would only be valid for very small ε; but if the true dynamics are highly irregular and you
have sampled so few points that ε cannot be made sufficiently small, then solving the inverse-problem of
inferring the dynamics is ill-posed in general, thus it isn’t surprising that a proper parameterisation exists.
The integer S is the number of segments in our uniformly partitioned Riemann sum approximation of
the integral; the minimum number of these segments required to approximate the integral up to a fixed
resolution will be a function of the underlying dynamics, denote this minimum value as s(µ, D; δT ) where
δT is the fixed resolution we require for the time resolved integrals. Furthermore, we could also consider the
number of samples that we need to draw from q such that we can approximate the integral:
Z
M
Kε(xi, y)dy ≈
1
|Ni|
X
j∈Ni
Kε(xi, xj)
(B.18)
for every xi ∈M given a value of ε, denote this as m(ε, q; δM) where δM is the fixed resolution we require
for the spatially resolved integrals. Since we assume ε is linear in the denominator of h(·), we can show that
m(ε, q; δM) ≈ε−d/2m(q; δM) for some function m(q) whose value depends on the inhomogeneity of q(x).30
Putting this together:
S ≥s(µ, D; δT ) =⇒ε ≤
T
s(µ, D; δT ),
and
m ≥m(ε, q; δM) =⇒ε ≥
m(q; δM)
m
2/d
(B.19)
The right-hand side of the lower bound on ε is effectively our ¯hmin, so for ODKs, or more generally any
local kernel, that seeks to approximate the underlying dynamics of a dynamical system, a given sample of
m samples from a distribution q(x) is insufficient for this task if:
s
T
s(µ, D; δT ) <
m(q; δM)
m
1/d
(B.20)
Which is an additional constraint that doesn’t need to be satisfied for kernels that only seek to represent
the geometry of M.
B.3.3
Heuristics for ε
Now that we have made this consideration, we will begin providing heuristic methods that one can use to
determine a good parametrisation of (ε, τ(x), ρ(x)2). We will proceed by first constructing a heuristic that
30The dependence on the dimension d in this formula for m(ε, q) is a realisation of the so-called curse-of-dimensionality,
whereby to resolve our statistics we must sample exponentially more points as the dimensionality increases.
75


quantifies the degree of degeneration that occurs as the bandwidth decreases; for convenience, we will assume
that ρ(x) has already been set. We define the maximum transition probability from a sample xi as:
pi
max(ε) = max
xj∈D Pε(xi, xj)
(B.21)
where Pε is to be viewed as our row-stochastic transition matrix, not the continuous operator; we also define
pmax(ε) := maxi=1,...,m pi
max(ε). For diffusion maps kernels with monotonically decreasing choices of h(·), we
will have pi
max(ε) = Pε(xi, xi), which is the self-transition probability, or, alternatively, the probability of
not doing anything. Since Pm
j=1 Pε(xi, xj) = 1, for any fixed set of parameters we will have pmax(ε) →0 as
m →∞, so it may seem as if this metric doesn’t tell us much, but for a fixed dataset pmax(ε) →1 as ε →0.
So if we set some threshold value ηp ∈(0, 1), for example ηp = 0.9, then for a given value of ε pmax(ε) > ηp
implies there is some xi ∈D where a diffusion kernel only diffuses 10% of the time — which seems like a
poor representation of diffusion on D. Thus, we can use pmax to determine whether our bandwidth is failing
to resolve somewhere in D; setting a more reasonable threshold, such as ηp = 0.5, can allow us to define a
lower bound on our bandwidth based on a heuristic notion of what we feel determines a good fit for us; i.e.
we can define εmin = inf{ε > 0 : pmax(ε) < ηp}.31
Supposing we have restricted the transitions of our kernel (ODK or otherwise) to a symmetric, connected,
neighbourhood graph32 of the data, denoted GD = (V, ED), and noting that this should not be the same
graph you use to compute the geodesic order of equation (B.16) and should be significantly larger. We could
think of GD as only being computed for the practical purposes of reducing the computation load of the
kernels and avoiding floating-point issues when we have transition probabilities being approximately zero
(long-distance transitions). Then we can construct a heuristic metric for a maximum bandwidth (and indeed
a maximum value of τ(x)) by computing the resolution as:
resi(ε) =
X
j:(i,j)∈ED
P D
ε (xi, xj)
(B.22)
where P D
ε has not been restricted to the graph GD and is applied to the whole dataset; as before we can also
define res(ε) = maxi=1,...,m resi(ε). This computes how much detail we are losing by restricting transitions
to GD. Thus, if we are happy with the validity of our constructed graph, then we can set some threshold
ηr ∈(0, 1) and if res(ε) > ηr we know that the bandwidth is too large to be represented on our graph in
some region of the data. This allows us to define εmax = sup{ε > 0 : res(ε) > ηr}. Putting this together
with εmin = inf{ε > 0 : pmax(ε) < ηp}, we can define an interval (εmin, εmax) such that we are confident our
kernel is well defined for any value of ε in this range.
We would also like to bring attention to a nice method from Shan & Daubechies [78], that provides a
principled and easily applicable metric to select on optimal bandwidth. It is true that the family of transition
operators {Pε}ε>0 will form a semi-group under composition,33 and will satisfy the relation PsPt = Ps+t.
Our discrete realisations of Pε will not satisfy this property exactly, but choosing the value of ε where this
discrepancy — referred to as the Semi-Group Error (SGE) — is minimised gives us a transition operator
that best respects the underlying algebra of the set. Since it seems reasonable to assume that the SGE will
be minimised for values of ε which best approximate exp(εL), since these operators will trivially satisfy the
composition rule, we can assume that the minimiser of the SGE will also give us a measure of when our
approximation to the continuous Pε(x, y) is the best given our restricting to the data. For clarity, we will
state the SGE as defined in [78]:
SGE(ε) = ∥PεPε −P2ε∥
(B.23)
where in their paper they used the operator norm, but we found simpler norms, such the Frobenius norm,
worked just as well. When working with real data (as opposed to synthetic data), we have often used pmax(ε)
and res(ε) to determine a maximal range of valid ε’s, and then used SGE(ε) to localise us within this range,
and within this local region we can then perform a grid search to determine our optimal choice of ε.
31In practice, there is some flexibility in how harshly we apply this threshold, it is likely true that not all samples are equally
important to us, so we could relax this to Q0.9({pmax(i) : i = 1, . . . , m}) > ηp where Qθ is the θth quantile of a set (assuming
a uniform distribution over the values).
32Under certain circumstance it might be reasonable to relax the symmetry constraint.
33A semi-group is a set with an associative binary operation (a group without identity of inverses).
76


B.3.4
Redundancy of ODK Parametrisations
The above discussion required ρ(x) to be fixed, as otherwise the above would not relate to ε but rather
ερ(x)2, and thus we would still have to choose how to balance this weight between the two parameters. To
proceed without ambiguity, we must note that there is some redundancy in the parameter space of an ODK.
Precisely, denote by Φ = (ε, τ(x), ρ(x)) ∈R>0 × C2(M) × C2(M), and element of this parameter space,
and let KΦ be the ODK with this parameterisation; assuming l(x) and κ(x) are fixed, then we can define
the following equivalence relationship Φ1 ∼Φ2 ⇐⇒KΦ1(x, y) = KΦ2(x, y), ∀x, y ∈M, by inspecting the
definition of an isotropic ODK as given in equation (5), we see that this is equivalent to the following:
Φ1 ∼Φ2 ⇐⇒∀x ∈M, ε1τ1(x) = ε2τ2(x) ∧ε1ρ1(x)2 = ε2ρ2(x)2
(B.24)
⇐⇒∀x ∈M,
τ1(x)
ρ1(x)2 = τ2(x)
ρ2(x)2 ∧ε1τ1(x)2
ρ1(x)2
= ε2τ2(x)2
ρ2(x)2
(B.25)
Equation (B.24) shows us that discussing the heuristic parametrisation of τ(x) and ρ(x)2 without fixing ε
creates redundancy in our parameter space since the equivalence class (set of all parameters which produce
the same kernel) of any parameterisation would satisfy:

(ε, τ(x), ρ(x)2)

= {(ε′, τ ′(x), ρ′(x)2) : ∃c > 0, ε′ = ε/c, τ ′(x) = cτ(x), ρ′(x)2 = cρ(x)2}
(B.26)
If we view ε as a time-scale again, then this equation is saying that all ODKs are equivalent up to a linear
time-change. It is worth dwelling on this: in the main text we always consider ε as being a time-scale of
the underlying process that generated the data, relative to the time horizon [0, T], with T < ∞. Supposing
we have parametrised our ODK with ground truth drift and diffusion, and some ε > 0, then we must apply
the adjoint transition operator to p0 approximately S = T
ε times before our time marginals have spanned
the data entirely. Equation (B.26) tells us that if we applied a linear time change ε′ = cε, for some c > 0,
we will get an identical kernel, and thus we must still apply our reparametrised ODK S times to span our
data, which implies the new effective time horizon of the underlying process is T ′ = Sε′ = cT; and thus this
redundancy in ODKs parameter space is structurally equivalent to equating all SDEs that are equal up to a
linear time-change.
This observation provides us much more freedom in our choice of ε when we are parametrising our kernel
heuristically, since we can always transform back to a regime where ε is a real time-scale of the underlying
process.
As an example, suppose T = 5, then we might decide that given the rough scale of the data
(maximum length scale maxxi,xj∈D∥xi −xj∥, and the spread of the data Vx∼q(x)) the most likely order
of magnitude of τ(x) and ρ(x)2 would allow us to set ε∗= 0.1 as our reference time-scale. We could then
arbitrarily set ε = 1 and then heuristically estimate the values for τ(xi) and ρ(xi) — using techniques already
mentioned above and/or those that we will shortly discuss — without any consideration for the value of ε.
After we are done, we can simply transform back to the physically relevant reference time-scale regime,
and thus our kernel would be unchanged, and our new heuristic estimates would be τ ∗(xi) = τ(xi)/ε∗and
ρ∗(xi) = ρ(xi)/
√
ε∗.
It is important to note that we are not getting anything for free here; we cannot simply rescale to ε′ ≪1
and claim our convergence results are better, since only ε’s that resolve on the data and can reasonably be
interpreted as a time-scale will give the asymptotics any definite meaning with respect to the underlying
process. Furthermore, if one simply rescaled ε and T and then applied the Lq or Lp optimisation schemes,
we would get identical results as we would if we didn’t rescale, since the time horizons change identically.
The utility of this rescaling would only be realised if we intended to estimate the drift and diffusion in a
dimensionless manner based on some geometric or statistical heuristics, and where, to this end, getting rid
of the extra degree of freedom is convenient. Another scenario where this rescaling invariance is of great use,
is if we didn’t know the time-horizon of the underlying process, in this case we cannot ascribe any meaning
to ε as a timescale, making it a truly dimensionless quantity that may as well be set equal to 1.34. If one
inferred the values of τ(x) and ρ(x) in a such a manner as to match the true underlying dynamics that
generated the data (for example, you applied the Lq or Lp objective of section 4.3); then the fact that it
34We remark that this is the case because the concept of a short or long time only makes sense relative to the global time-
horizone which you are considering; i.e. a decade is a long time relative to the life of a human, but it is an exceptionally short
time relative to the age of the universe.
77


is possible to rescale ODKs to a more physical time-scale allows you to still claim you have learnt the true
underlying dynamics, just up to a multiplicative constant. Furthermore, quantities of the form τ(x)kρ(y)−2k
for any non-zero k will be invariant to linear time-changes; thus, one can talk very precisely about such
relative quantities.
We can group the equivalence conditions given in equations (B.24) & (B.25) into the following list:
Ψ(x) = τ(x)
ρ(x)2 ,
ψ(x) = ετ(x)2
ρ(x)2 ,
b(x) = ετ(x),
a(x) = ερ(x)2
(B.27)
We call Ψ(x) the drift-to-diffusion ratio, b(x) the drift-scale, and a(x) the diffusion scale; the dimensions
of each can be determined from: ετ ∼[L] - a length scale; τ ∼[L][t]−1 = [u] - rate of advection; and
ρ2 ∼[D] = [L]2[t]−1 - rate of diffusion; thus ψ(x) ∼[L][u]
[D]
= [1], is a dimensionless number in the form of
a P´eclet number [14]. A P´eclet number can be seen as a measure of the relative difference in the rate of
transport due to advection, against the rate of transport due to diffusion. We can also see that Ψ(x) ∼[L]−1
is an inverse length scale, and particularly, it is invariant under linear time changes; so fixing a functional
form for one regime will fix it for all others. This property makes Ψ(x) difficult to set heuristically, unless one
had some additional information that resulted in a restricted functional form of Ψ(x); if one were running
multiple heuristic parametrisations of ODK, then setting the functional form of Ψ(x) to be different across
each would ensure each ODK is fundamentally distinct.
It is the quantities given in equation (B.27) that we will construct heuristics for estimating. We note
that there are only two degrees of freedom in this choice, since fixing any two of these quantities determines
the others; thus, of the below-listed heuristics, we only need to apply at most two.
B.3.5
Constructing a Length Scale
If we wished to fix ετ(x) ∼[L] or ερ(x)2 ∼[L]2, we need a local estimate of the length scale in each
neighbourhood of xi ∈D, this length scale will be adaptive to the sampling density thus almost guarantees
a good fit for the kernel by ensuring it doesn’t degenerate. The most common method to extract such a
length scale is to choose some k ∈N>0 and define ri,k = ∥xi −xk
i ∥∼[L]. It has been shown that such
bandwidths significantly improve convergence of the discrete Laplacian to the continuous Laplacian when
the data is sampled non-uniformly [10]. If one assumes that k is large enough as to mitigate the variance in
computing local estimates, but small enough so that over Bi,k := B(xi, ∥xi −xk
i ∥) we can assume that q(x)
is approximately uniform, then up to the leading order we will have q(x) ∝∥xi −xi,k∥−d. This can be seen
through the following argument:
k
m ≈q(Bi,k) =
Z
Bi,k
q(y)dy ≈q(xi)Vol(Bi,k) =⇒q(xi) ∝
1
Vol(Bi,k) = Γ
  d
2 + 1

πd/2rd
i,k
∝
1
∥xi −xi,k∥d
(B.28)
The sketch we provide does not produce a consistent estimator of the density, for this one needs ˆq(x) =
((k(m) −1)/m) Vol(B(x, rk(m)))−1, where k(m) satisfies limm→∞k(m) = ∞and limm→∞k(m)/m = 0,
and rk(m) = ∥xi −xk(m)
i
∥is a random variable depending on the sample D, and where we use the fact
that P(B(x, rk(m))) ∼Beta(k(m), m −k(m) + 1); to see how this all comes together we refer the reader
to [60] for more details. To us the important detail from the proof is that the neighbourhood parameter
k(m) = o(m) and k(m) →∞as m →∞, so we know that arbitrarily choosing k = 30 for every sample
is not prudent. Equation (B.28) is effectively saying that the neighbourhood one defines in a kNN-graph
is specifically adapted to the underlying sampling density; therefore, choosing Li = ∥xi −xk
i ∥, and setting
ερ(xi)2 ∝L2
i will also make you kernel adaptive to the underlying distribution, and thus it is very unlikely
one will have issues with kernel degeneration in this setting. Other estimators of a local length scale are
possible, such as:
log Li = 1
k
k
X
j=1
log∥xi −xj
i∥⇐⇒Li =


k
Y
j=1
∥xi −xj
i∥


1/k
(B.29)
By averaging in log-space, we reduce the variance of our length scale estimate and stabilise the absolute
differences log Li−log Lj, which can be equivalently seen as stabilising the relative differences Li/Lj, making
78


our length scales more comparable over the data. Furthermore, since the length scale is estimated from
samples in a d-dimensional volume around xi, it is may be more justified to consider the geometric mean as
opposed to the arithmetic mean, since the relationship between length and volume is multiplicative; this is
indicated by the fact that the geometric mean is far less dampened estimator of the radius of data sampled
uniformly in a d-dimensional hypersphere.
Since ετ(xi) ∼[L], fixing a length scale can allow us to set one or both of ρ(xi) = cρLi and τ(xi) = cτLi,
for appropriate constants of proportionality cτ, cρ > 0. It is important to note that the length scales of
the drift and diffusion need not be the same, and setting them as such enforces a hard constraint on the
drift-to-diffusion ratio Ψ(x) ∝L−1
i , i.e. the drift-to-diffusion ratio will be adapted to the underlying density.
B.3.6
Determing ψ(x) through a notion of Advection Rate
Consider an idealised d-dimensional Gaussian density p ∼N(ετe1, ερ2Id), where e1 is a basis vector in the
first coordinate dimension of Rd. We define the Forward Bias as FB(ε, τ, ρ) := P({x ∈Rd : x1 > 0}, if
we suppose e1 = ∇l(x)
κ(x) , FB then the forward bias tells us the probability, given our parameterisation, of
transitioning to a higher-ordered state. We can derive an expression for this through:
FB(ε, τ, ρ) =
1
(2περ2)d/2
Z ∞
0
Z
Rd−1 exp

−∥x −ετed∥2
2ερ2

dx2:ddx1
(B.30)
=
1
(2περ2)1/2
Z ∞
0
exp

−(x1 −ετ)2
2ερ2

dx1
d
Y
i=2
1
(2περ2)1/2
Z ∞
−∞
exp

−x2
i
2ερ2

dxi
(B.31)
=
1
√π
Z ∞
−
√ετ
√
2ρ
e−u2du = 1
2erfc
 r
ψ
2
!
(B.32)
Hence the forward bias is entirely a function of the P´eclet-like ratio φ(x). So if we preset some value for the
Forward Bias, say FB = ηf, then we will have ψ = 2erfc−1(2ηf)2, and thus fixes one of the four quantities
of equation (B.27).
B.3.7
Additional Comment on the Effects of Increasing Dimensionality
It is true that in high dimensions the covariance of a Gaussian does not act as our intuitions expect; consider a
zero mean Gaussian distribution on Rd, with covariance σ2Id, then it is known that P(B(0, r)) = P

d
2, r2
2σ2

,
where P(s, x) is the regularised lower-incomplete gamma function, and can be written as:
P(s, x) =
1
Γ(s)
Z x
0
ts−1e−tdt =
xse−x
Γ(s + 1)
∞
X
k=0
xk
s(k)
(B.33)
where s(k) = Qk−1
i=0 (s+i) is the Pochhammer symbol. By applying Stirlings formula for the gamma function,
we can show that log P(s, x) ≈−s(log s −log x −1) −x which implies up to the leading order log P(s, x) ∼
−s log s and thus P(s, x) →0 as s →∞; we show evaluations of the P

d
2, r2
2σ2

across r2 being integer
multiples of the covariance and d varying from 1 −20 in table 1.
Our intuition from lower dimensions is that being a distance of 3σ away from the mean of a Gaussian
distribution is textit far away from the perspective of one’s likelihood to be sampled there. Table 1 shows
us that the probability of being sampled at a distance of less than 3σ from the mean decays rapidly as d
increases; indeed, when d = 10 it is now more probable that we sample a state to be further than 3σ from
the mean than it is to sample one closer. This is a clear manifestation of the concentration of measure
[56], where it is shown that high-dimensional Euclidean metrics begin to lose their discriminative power as
d →∞. We can be more rigorous in this discussion by letting Pd/2(x) = P(d/2, x) and noting that this is a
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) and thus is monotonically increasing in x, and its inverse exists;
define the radius to be:
rad(d, ηd; σ) = σ
q
2P −1
d/2(ηd) ≈σ
√
d

1 + Φ−1
0,1(ηd)
q
2
9d −2
9d
3/2
(B.34)
79


r \ d
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
σ
0.6827
0.3935
0.0902
0.0144
0.0018
0.0002
∼10−5
∼10−6
∼10−8
∼10−9
∼10−10
2σ
0.9545
0.8647
0.5940
0.3233
0.1429
0.0527
0.0166
0.0045
0.0011
0.0002
∼10−5
3σ
0.9973
0.9889
0.9389
0.8264
0.6577
0.4679
0.2971
0.1689
0.0866
0.0403
0.0171
4σ
0.9999
0.9997
0.9970
0.9862
0.9576
0.9004
0.8088
0.6866
0.5470
0.4075
0.2834
5σ
1.0000
1.0000
0.9999
0.9997
0.9984
0.9947
0.9852
0.9654
0.9302
0.8751
0.7986
Table
1:
Numerical
evaluation
of
the
regularised
lower
incomplete
gamma
function
P

d
2,
r2
2σ2

=
P
 {x ∈Rd : ∥x∥< r}

, where the latter expression gives the probability of sample x ∼N(0, σ2Id) being inside
the ball or radius r. Each row represents gives r = kσ for k = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and we vary the dimensionality along the
columns, d = 1, 2, 4, . . . , 20.
where Φ0,1 is the CDF of a standard univariate normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1.
To
deduce the approximate form in equation B.34, we note that if x ∼N(0, Id) then ∥x∥2 ∼χ2
d, by definition,
and therefore ηd = P(d/2, r2/2) = P(χ2
d ≤r2) which allows us to rewrite the formula for the radius as
rad(d, ηd) =
q
Qχ2
d(ηd), where Qχ2
d is the quantile function (inverse cdf) of a χ2
d random variable.
In
equation 5 of [98], Wilson gives the following approximation: W := (χ2
d/d)1/3 ≈N(µ = 1 −
2
9d, σ2 =
2
9d),
putting this together:
ηd = P(χ2
d ≤r2) = P

σ−1(W −µ) ≤σ−1

r2
d
1/3
−µ

= Φ0,1(s)
(B.35)
Therefore, setting zηd := Φ−1
0,1(ηd) we can easily show that r =
√
d(µ + σzηd)3/2, which, after rescaling by σ,
is the exact form of equation (B.34) after substituting the values for µ and σ. Thus, the radius defining the
boundary beyond which we don’t expect to see many samples scales with
√
d as d increases. We can get the
same result by applying the central limit theorem to ∥x∥2, in which we see:
∥x∥2 = d
 Pd
i=1 x2
i
d
−σ2
!
+ dσ2 ∼N(dσ2, 2dσ4)
(B.36)
where we have used the fact that E[x2
i ] = σ2 and E[x4
i ] −E[x2
i ]2 = (κ −1)σ4 = 2σ4 where κ is the kurtosis of
the Gaussian random variable xi, and which we know is equal to 3. We can then write ∥x∥2 = dσ2 +
√
2dσ2z
where z ∼N(0, 1), the leading order term of which is dσ2 which is exactly the leading order term of
rad(d, η; σ)2.
Thus, whether we introduce a dimension-dependent rescaling would depend partly on whether Li ∼σ or
Li ∼σ
√
d, i.e. whether Li is a statistical or geometric scale. It is true that the best isotropic approximation
to a d-dimensional Gaussian with arbitrary covariance Σ is given by
  1
dtr Σ

Id, and we can see that:
1
dtr Σ = 1
d
d
X
i=1
E[(xi −E[xi])2] = 1
dE[∥x −E[x]∥2] ∝1
d∥x −xk∥2 ∼σ2
(B.37)
Hence if Li ∼σi, then setting ερ2(xi) ∼d · L2
i will remove some of the dimensionality dependence in the
norm and thus such a scaling will make the resulting kernel more intuitive from the perspective of this length
scale; however, if Li ∼
√
dσ, i.e. you have used Li = ∥xi −xk
i ∥, then it would not be wise to rescale by the
dimensionality and thus leaving ερ2 ∼L2
i is more prudent.
Ultimately, if you use the Euclidean metric in high dimensions, you will run into issues due to the
concentration of measure: distances will become very large and roughly symmetric about their mean. No
amount of rescaling can fix the loss of discrimination, but if you have constructed a length scale that
depends on intrinsic distributional scales, then introducing a dimension-dependent rescaling may help make
one’s kernels more interpretable.
B.4
Strang Splitting Scheme
In this supplementary note, we will give some theoretical context for the Strang splitting scheme that we
introduce in section 3.2 to generalise ODKs to anisotropic diffusions; we will also discuss the choice of the
80


parameter α ∈(0, 1) that splits the diffusion between our two operators.
To recap, we have applied two kernels that approximate the following two operators:
Lµ = µi∂i + 1
2Dij
µ ∂i∂j
where:
Dµ = ασ2
hρ2λmin(A)Id
(B.38)
LA = 1
2Dij
A∂i∂j
where:
DA = σ2
hρ2(A −αλmin(A)Id) = σ2
hρ2A −Dµ
(B.39)
where A(x) is a field of symmetric positive definite
 2
0

-tensors over M; µ(x) is an arbitrary vector field since
we could construct Lµ using a local order; σh(x) is a feature of the choice of ODK; 1
2ρ2A(x) is the diffusion
tensor we wish to reconstruct; λmin(A(x)) > 0 is the smallest eigenvalue of A(x) which must be greater
than zero due to the assumption of A being positive definite; finally, α ∈(0, 1) is a parameter we choose
that decides how to split the diffusion contributions between the two kernels. Our goal is to approximate
the operator L = µi∂i + 1
2Dij∂i∂j where D = σ2
hρ2A and we note that indeed L = Lµ + LA so we could
stop here if L was all we wanted. However, by doing this we are breaking the usual chain of constructions
Gε →Pε →Lε, since we do not know the ε transition matrix of the Markov process we are building, and
indeed if the errors in estimating Lµ and LA with Lµ
ε and LA
ε add up unfavourably, there may exist no
valid matrix Pε such that ε−1(Pε −I) = Lµ
ε + LA
ε . More fundamentally, the family of transition operators
{Pε}ε>0 ∪{I} forms a semi-group (no inverses) under composition (which is matrix multiplication in the
discrete case) and L is the (operator) right derivative of this group at ε = 0, and acts (when it exists) as
the unique generator of the transition group through exponentiation, i.e. Pε = exp(εL), where the operator
exponential is defined in terms of its power-series exp(εL) = P∞
k=0
εk
k Lk. Since composition of transition
operators is a multiplicative operation, it seems natural to construct our desired Pε in such a manner; we
see that:
Pε = exp(εL) = exp(εLµ + εLA)
(B.40)
we also have that P µ
ε
= exp(εLµ) and P A
ε
= exp(εLA), the crux is that unless Lµ and LA commute,
exp(εLµ + εLA)̸ = exp(εLµ) exp(εLA). For two operators A, B, we denote the commutator as [A, B] :=
AB −BA; the commutator trivially satisfies that A and B commute if and only if [A, B] = 0. The Baker-
Campbell-Hausdorff (BCH) formula (as given in [41], Chapter 3.4) gives as expansion in terms of ε for an
operator Cε such that exp(Cε) = exp(εA) exp(εB), the CBH gives this expansion as:
Cε = ε(A + B) + 1
4ε2[A, B] + 1
12ε3 ([A, [A, B]] + [B, [B, A]]) + 1
24ε4[A, [B, [B, A]]] + . . .
(B.41)
with all terms of order ε2 and higher being in terms of the commutator of A and B - a quick sanity check
then shows that if [A, B] = 0 that Cε = ε(A+B). Thus, the error of approximating Pε with P A
ε P µ
ε , is O(ε2)
in the log-space of Pε, where log Pε = log exp(εL) = εL the inverse of the operator exponential (defined in
terms of its power series). This approximation scheme is often called Lie-Trotter Splitting ([90]), and is a
generalisation of the first-order Euler method for numerical integration. Naturally, we can reduce the error
in our approximation by considering generalisations of higher-order integration methods; a generalisation of
the Verlet Scheme gives:
Pε ≈P A
ε/2P µ
ε P A
ε/2
(B.42)
which, in the context of operators, is called the Strang Splitting Scheme ([84]). Applying the BCH expansion
twice, we find the Laplacian approximation error to be:
log

P A
ε/2P µ
ε P A
ε/2

−εL = 1
12ε3  
Lµ, [Lµ, LA]

−1
2

LA, [LA, Lµ]

+ O(ε5)
(B.43)
where every even power of ε has been cancelled. We note that this cancellation is a property of the symmetry
of the product, not of the halving of ε in the outer terms; the ε/2 ensures the first-order term equals εL,
and indeed matches the Verlet Scheme for integrating functions. Naturally, we are faced with a choice of
whether to have P µ
ε or P A
ε as the central term, but we found during numerical experimentation that having
the drifted term in the centre (as in equation (B.42)) is more accurate and more robust to the choice of α
than the other way around. This intuitively makes sense, as if the drift were anything other than linear, it
would push the probability in the direction of µ(x) and then µ(x + ε
2µ(x)) which are not necessarily colinear
for a practical value of ε; the robustness to α is likely due to the eigenstructure of A(x), if the smallest
eigenvalue is too small then ε cannot be made small without degenerating the kernel.
81


B.4.1
Choosing α ∈(0, 1)
To apply the Strang splitting scheme we introduced a parameter α ∈(0, 1) to determine how the diffusion is
split between the two operators Lµ
α = µ · ∇+ 1
2αρ2λmin(A)∆and LA
α = 1
2ρ2(A −αλmin(A)Id)ij∇i∇j, where
λmin(A −αλmin(A)Id) = (1 −α)λmin(A). In theory, α is a free parameter for you to choose, but in practice,
we need to choose α such that both P A
ε/2 and P µ
ε are best resolved on the data. We will proceed to make
two rather Heuristic arguments, before ultimately contradicting ourselves.
Suppose in a local neighbourhood of any given x ∈D, samples are roughly uniformly distributed; then
the kernel becomes degenerate when it decays almost entirely (along its weakest direction) before being
evaluated on a neighbouring data point. We could write this as ελmin(Σ) ≥c(D) where Σ is a positive-
definite covariance matrix, and c(D) will depend on the dimension of the underlying manifold and the
number of data points, as we are not being rigorous we simply assume c to be constant across all x ∈D. In
the case of P A
ε/2,α and P µ
ε,α we have the constraints:
P A
ε/2,α :
1
2ερ2λmin(A −αλmin(A)Id)
≥c
=⇒1
2ε(1 −α)
≥
c
ρ2λmin(A)
(B.44)
P µ
ε,α :
ερ2αλmin(A)
≥c
=⇒εα
≥
c
ρ2λmin(A)
(B.45)
If we say that the optimal α is the one which allows us to make ε the smallest:
ε∗(α) = max

2c
(1 −α)λmin(A)ρ2 ,
c
αλmin(A)ρ2

= max

2
1 −α, 1
α

c
ρ2λmin(A)
(B.46)
= min
1 −α
2
, α
−1
c
ρ2λmin(A)
(B.47)
i.e. choosing α such that min((1 −α)/2, α) is minimal allows us to choose the smallest value of ε. It is not
hard to show that α = 1
3 is this value.
Our second argument looks at the ε3 error term in equation (B.43). This argument is incredibly hand-
wavy, but if we suppose Lµ ∝α and LA ∝(1 −α), then, after completely ignoring the application of the
commutator, we would have:
2

Lµ, [Lµ, LA]

−

LA, [LA, Lµ]

∝2α2(1 −α) −α(1 −α)2
(B.48)
the absolute value of which is minimised at α = 1
3. Putting this unreasonable argument together with the
heuristic argument involving ε∗we feel emboldened in our belief that α∗
heuristic = 1
3 is the optimal value of α.
In spite of our confidence, when we tested this splitting method on synthetic data (as shown in the operator
results of section 4.1), we found that α∗
data = 2
3 produced the best approximation of Lε to L (quantified via
the L2-norm).
Furthermore, if we reversed the order of composition, both of the above heuristic arguments would result
in a new optimum of 1 −α∗
heuristic, but by switching the order of composition in the numerical example of
4.1 we see that the optimum remains fixed at 2
3. This tells us that the two heuristics we gave above seem to
have no bearing on the optimal α, and that the composition scheme is not the limiting factor in making the
approximation ¯Pε,α. In hindsight this latter point is not surprising, since by Theorem 3.1, we know that the
leading order error in approximating any Pε can be as high as O(ε3/2), and thus the O(ε3) error coming from
the composition would be insignificant in comparison. This leads us to conclude that the choice of α depends
on the eigenstructure of A(x) and one should choose α as large as is possible without Pε/2,α degenerating on
the data. We also believe that the optimal order of composition for the Strang splitting scheme will depend
on which of A(x) and µ(x) is changing most rapidly on the data — and since in practice variations of µ are
likely to cause more pronounced errors we would generally recommend using P A
ε/2,αP µ
ε,αP A
ε/2,α.
B.5
Riemannian Geometry Preliminaries
In this appendix, we will give some background on the tools from differential geometry that we use throughout
this paper; we hope that this provides clarity on which differential geometric concepts are important to us
and how and why we use them.
82


We assume that we are working on a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold embedded in Rn, where n ≫d;
we usually denote this manifold as M, but when we do so, we are talking about the manifold intrinsically.
It would be more proper to say that (M, gM) is a d-dimensional Riemannian manifold with metric gM, and
there is an embedding ι : M →Rn whose image we denote N := ι(M). In differential geometry, an embed-
ding is an immersion that is also a differentiable homeomorphism onto its image (i.e. a diffeomorphism); the
latter condition means that the topological structure (the open sets) of M and N are identical, while being
an immersion (guarantees that the manifold structure is preserved through the mapping; therefor, ι being
an embedding means that N is a d-dimensional submanifold of the n-dimensional manifold Rn. In addition,
(M, gM) is (locally) a metric space, so for us to consider (M, gM) and (N, gM) is be isomorphic under ι we
need the additional condition that ι : (M, gM) →(N, gN ) be an isometry — in other words, distances on
M and N are also the same — this is equivalent to gM = ι∗gN where ι∗is the pullback and is defined as
ι∗gN (u, v) = gN (Dι(u), Dι(v)). Any calculations we make we do so on N ⊂Rn, but we assume there is an
isometric embedding ι that allows us to consider all quantities computed on N as being computed on M and
we do so without ambiguity. Furthermore, we assume that gN is inheritted from the Euclidean metric on Rn,
i.e. for any x ∈M let u, v ∈TxM, then ˜u = Dι(x)(u) and ˜v = Dι(x)(v) will be two vectors in Rn such that
ι(x)+ ˜u and ι(x)+ ˜v are tangent to N in Rn at ι(x), we assume that gN (˜u, ˜v) = ⟨˜u, ˜v⟩2 = ˜uT ˜v = u(DιT Dι)v,
and thus the metric gM = DιT Dι when written in orthonormal coordinates (projection coordinates as we
will soon call them) on N. From now on we hope that you are convinced that we may work unambiguously
on the manifold M with metric gM.
A geodesic through a point x ∈M is a curve γ : I →M, where I ⊂R is a closed interval of the
form [0, T] such that γ(0) = x and whose rate of change is constant (constant velocity), and which we
formulate as γ having no acceleration. To formalise this we need to have a notion of differentiation vector
fields which require us to be able to take differences of the form γ′(t+dt)−γ′(t), where γ′(t) is the standard
derivative of γ : I →φ(U) where (U, φ) is a coordinate chart containing γ(t) and which has a coordinate
independent meaning up to composition with the transition functions of compatible charts. The issue is
that γ′(t + dt) ∈Tγ(t+dt)M and γ′(t) ∈Tγ(t)M exist in different vector spaces and thus cannot be naively
subtracted. This results in the notion of a connection which allows us to connect different vector spaces
defined over M together; more formally, suppose that E is a vector bundle over M, and E(M) is the space
of smooth sections of E35, then a connection in E is a map ∇: T M × E(M) →E(M) which takes a section
of the tangent bundle (i.e. a vector field) and a section of the E and outputs another section of E, and must
be linear over C∞(M) in the first argument, linear in R in the second argument, and for f ∈C∞(M) must
satisfy the product rule ∇X(fY ) = f∇X(Y ) + (Xf)Y where Xf(p) = df(X(p)) is the directional derivative
of f in the direction X(p). This gives the connection the structure of a directional derivative and thus ∇XY
is called the covariant derivative of Y in the direction of X. If E(M) = T (M), i.e. E = TM is the tangent
bundle, then we call ∇: T (M) × T (M) →T (M) a linear connection on M; without going into detail,
there is a one-to-one correspondence between linear connections and choices of d3 smooth functions Γk
ij on
M, and they are related through:
∇XY = (Xi∂iY k + XiY jΓk
ij)∂k
(B.49)
The smooth functions Γk
ij are called the Christoffel symbols, and although they are written with tensor
indices, they are not a tensor. It is also true that: every smooth manifold will admit a linear connection
and this can be proved constructively; the existence of a linear connection induces (under the addition
of constraints) a unique connection on each tensor bundle T k
l M.36 The connection is the mathematical
machinery that allows us to take the derivative of a vector field along a curve: supposing ∇is a linear
connection and γ : I →M a curve, then ∇determines a unique operator Dt : T (γ) →T (γ) which maps
smooth vector fields to smooth vector fields over γ(I), that satisfies linearity over R, the product rule and
(if V ∈T (γ) is a restriction of some vector field ˜V ∈T (M)) DtV (t) = ∇γ′(t) ˜V ; we call Dt the covariant
35A rank-n vector bundle, E, over M is a set of the form E = F
x∈M Dx where each Dx has the structure of a vector space
and all Dx have dimension n; a smooth section of a bundle is a smooth function V : M →E : x 7→(x, v) where v ∈Dx, i.e. a
section of a bundle maps points of M to vectors in E.
36This notation defines the bundle of all type
 k
l

-tensors across M.
A
 k
l

-tensor can be viewed as a multilinear map
acting on k-covariant vectors and l-contravariant vectors; we recall that co- and contravariant vectors are determined by the
transformation properties of the vector with respect to a change in coordinates, where covariant vectors transform identically
to the coordinate basis and contravariant vectors inversely to the coordinates.
83


derivative along γ. A vector field V is said to be parallel along γ if DtV ≡0, if V is parallel along any curve
then we just say V is parallel, it is true that for any curve γ and V0 ∈Tγ(0)M that there is a unique parallel
vector field V along γ such that V (γ(0)) = V0; the uniqueness in our statement allows us to unambiguously
transport a vector V0 along γ to a vector V (γ(T)) ∈Tγ(T )M.
We already have enough machinery to describe a geodesic, but we will deal with two further technicalities
first. The first issue is that if X, Y ∈TpM and we take a short path parallel to X, taking us to x, and
then from x take another short path parallel to Y to get to q, supposing the short paths we the same, would
r ∈M — the point reached after taking the short path parallel to Y to get to y, and then the short path
parallel X at y — be the same as q? It turns out that this need not be true, and the extent of this failure can
be quantified by the torsion tensor τ(X, Y ) = ∇XY −∇Y X −[X, Y ], where [·, ·] is the Lie-Bracket of vector
fields (or equivalently the commutator when viewing a vector field as an operator on smooth functions).
For any connection on a Euclidean space τ(X, Y ) ≡0, so we will assume that our chosen connection ∇
satisfies this as well — in such a case the linear connection is called symmetric, and this is equivalent to
the associated Christoffel symbols satisfying Γk
ij = Γk
ji. The final constraint we need is that our chosen
connection is compatible with the metric, i.e. ∇Xg(Y, Z) = g(∇XY, Z) + g(Y, ∇XZ), this is equivalent to:
∇g ≡0; if V, W are parallel vector fields along a curve γ, then g(V, W) is constant; parallel translation
is an isometry. Thus, we can invoke the fundamental lemma of Riemannian geometry, which states: for a
Riemannian manifold (M, g), there is a unique linear connection ∇that is compatible with g and symmetric
— we call this unique connection the Levi-Civita connection.
As a result, we can define a geodesic through a point x ∈M as a curve γ : I →M originating at x and
satisfying Dt ˙γ ≡0 where Dt is with respect to the unique symmetric connection compatible with gM. Given
x ∈M and v ∈TxM there exists a unique maximal geodesic γv : I →M such that γ(0) = x and ˙γ(0) = v.
We can define a subset of the tangent bundle E := {V ∈TM : γV is defined on the interval [0, 1]} ⊂TM in
which the so-called exponential map can be naturally defined exp : E →M : V 7→γV (1), with expx being
the exponential map restricted to TxM (i.e. E ∩TxM). Two important properties of the exponential map
are: it commutes over isometries, i.e. ι ◦expx = expι(x) ◦Dι; there exists a neighbourhood V ⊂TxM of the
origin, and a neighbourhood U of x in M such that expx : V →U is a diffeomorphism, any neighbourhood U
in which this property holds is called a normal neighbourhood. If {ei}d
i=1 form an orthonormal basis of TxM
with respect to the metric g = gM, then we can define the isomorphism E : Rd →TxM : (x1, . . . , xd) 7→
xiei, if U is a normal neighbourhood of x then φ := E−1 ◦exp−1
x
: U →Rd defines a coordinate chart,
the respective coordinates are called the normal coordinates at x. Expressing things in terms of normal
coordinates flattens U in the most canonical manner; thus, many Euclidean intuitions hold true in these
coordinates. In particular, if we write the metric in these coordinates, we will find gij = δij, i.e. the metric
appears flat.
We can define another set of coordinates on M that flattens the metric using the fact that N = ι(M) ⊂
Rn, thus we can view TxM, for any x ∈M, as being an affine subspace of Rn, i.e. a d-dimensional subspace
Wx ≤Rn and TxM ∼= ι(x) + Wx, and let us denote TxN = x + Wx. Taking any orthonormal basis {¯ei}d
i=1
of Wx, noting that ¯ei ∈Rn and with orthonormality being in the sense of the Euclidean inner product, then
defining the projection operator Px : Rn →Rd : v1¯e1 + . . . vd¯ed 7→(v1, . . . , vd) we can define the coordinate
chart ϕx : U →Rd : y 7→Px(ι(y) −ι(x)), where U is an open neighbourhood of x such that Px is injective on
ι(U); the existence of such a neighbourhood is guaranteed by the implicit function theorem. We call these
coordinates the projection coordinates, and note that unlike the normal coordinates, they depend on the
embedding ι.
If we define the normal coordinates, (s1, . . . , sd), and projection coordinates, (u1, . . . , ud), with respect
to the same orthonormal basis — i.e. Dι(e1) = ¯e1 using the previous notation — then these two coordinate
charts are naturally related. The projection coordinates take the best possible affine approximation to N
at some ι(x), whereas the normal coordinates, by nature of their implicit definition on M, will curve along
N, we could think of the normal coordinates as being the shadow of the projection coordinates projected
down onto N; hence they are highly related but not identical equal to one another. We now make a very
practical note that is relevant to us: when we talk about derivatives of functions or write the norm ∥x −y∥2
we are imagining to be doing this directly on the manifold M with respect to normal coordinates; but it is
difficult to perform some of these computations exactly (such as the expansion of Gεf(x) given in section 3)
in these coordinates since the exponential map is non-linear, but since the projection coordinates are truly
flat on N, it is much more preferable to change from normal coordinates to projection coordinates.
84


To change to coordinates in the integral of Gεf(x) given in the proof of Theorem 3.1 in Appendix A, we
must expand ∥y −x∥2 and dy in terms of projection coordinates, and we must convert the Taylor expansion
of f(y) and l(y) in normal coordinates, to being in terms of projection coordinates. Doing the former allows
us to compute the integrals we need, and the latter combines intrinsic derivatives (calculated using normal
coordinates) with projection coordinates, allowing us to derive our Laplacian L. In the remainder of this
subsection, we will overview some other relevant concepts from differential geometry.
In section 3.2, we discuss a non-isotropic extension of ODK and consider the metric on M to be non-
trivial; and in section 4.2, we consider a non-isometric embedding, which also results in having to consider a
non-trivial metric. There will still exist normal coordinates on M such that gij = δij, but these will not align,
as before, with the projection coordinates we implicitly use; therefore, the metric must remain non-trivial.
This adds complexity to the derivatives, where now the differential of a scalar function df ∈T ∗M, and the
gradient grad(f) =: ∇gf must be compatible with the metric through the following relation
df(v) = g(∇gf, v) ⇐⇒∂ifvi = gij∇i
gfvj ⇐⇒∇i
gf = gij∂jf
(B.50)
where ∂if are the standard partial derivatives of f with respect to some coordinates, and gij is the inverse
metric tensor satisfying gikgkj = δi
j. This introduces the idea of using the metric to raise or lower and index;
this is often denoted using musical notation with “X-flat” being the lowering of the index of contravariant
vector X, with X♭= gijXjdxi, and “ω-sharp” being the raising of the index of a covariant vector ω,
with ω♯= gijωj∂i; thus, we can see that ∇gf = df ♯. The divergence will also change as is again defined
implicitly through d(iXdV ) = (divgX)dV , where dV =
p
| det g|dx1 ∧· · · ∧dxd is the volume form and
iXω(V1, . . . , Vk−1) = ω(X, V1, . . . , Vk−1) is in the interior multiplication operator taking k-forms to (k −1)-
forms, so if X is your vector field then iXdV will take the parallelepiped defined by the volume for dV
break it into a sum of each side of it not including dxi scaled by Xi, so is the sum of scaled area elements;
d(iXdV ) asks how all these area elements are changing and glues it back together into another volume
form; the divergence is a measure of how much rescaling by X managed to change the volume form and
can be found to be equal to divg(X) = |g|−1/2∂i(|g|1/2Xi). The Laplace-Beltrami operator is defined to be
∆gf = divg(∇gf) and thus we can write this in coordinates as:
∆gf =
1
√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij∂jf

(B.51)
When our metric is trivial, we will have gij = δij and |g| ≡1 and thus ∆gf = ∂i∂jf, so we arrive back at
the regular Euclidean Laplacian, but if we cannot trivialise our metric, then we must account for how the
metric affects our derivatives. In general, the non-trivial backwards Laplacian will equal:
Lgf = µ(f) + 1
2ρ2∆gf = µi∂if +
ρ2
2√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij∂jf

(B.52)
where we note that the first term is equivalent to g(∇gf, µ). The adjoint operator will take the form:
L∗
gf = −divg(µf) + 1
2∆g(ρ2f) = −
1
√
|g|∂i(
p
|g|µif) +
1
2√
|g|∂i
p
|g|gij∂j(ρ2f)

(B.53)
Since we still implicitly use the projection coordinates, the Laplacians that we approximate will no longer
respect the more complex Laplacians above, as they will not incorporate the change of the metric of the
manifold. Local Kernels introduced a method to approximate, under mild constraints, ∆g by constructing a
symmetrised kernel ¯Kε(x, y) = Kε(x, y)+Kε(y, x); and we, in section 3.2, construct the full Laplacians given
above under harder constraints, namely, we ask that µeff := (∂igij + 1
2gij∂i log |g|)∂j, which is the effective
advection term introduced by ∆g be such that ∃a, φ ∈C∞(M) satisfying µeff = a∇φ which allows us to use
extensions of ODK such as mODK, stODK, or the density α-regularised ODK, which introduce terms in this
form and which can then combine with the non-isotropic ODK to form the above two Laplacian operators.
The last piece of machinery from differential geometry that we discuss is the second fundamental form,
which allows us to quantify the curvature of a manifold within the context of an embedding into another,
larger manifold, which for us would be ι : M →Rn. Suppose ¯∇is the standard covariant derivative on
Rn, then the second fundamental form defined as II : T (M) × T (M) →N(M) : (X, Y ) 7→( ¯∇XY )⊥,
i.e. we take the normal part of the covariant derivative of Y in the direction of X in Rn and is naturally
85


then a measure of curvature.
The trace of the second fundamental form is called the mean curvature
vector and is denoted as H(x) = Pd
i=1 II(x)(∂i, ∂i). This is relavant to us because the mean displacement
ˇvmd(xi) = Pm
j=1 Pε(xi, xj)(xj −xi) = Lει(xi), where Lι = (Lι1, . . . , Lιn)T , and thus ˇvmd = Lει ≈v+ 1
2ρ2∆ι,
where v is the underlying velocity and 1
2ρ2 a diffusion and ∆ι(x) = H(x) the mean curvature vector of the
embedding (this is proven on Pg. 41 of [18]). By the definition of the second fundamental form giving values
in the normal bundle of ι(M), the trace — which is then a sum of normal vectors — will also point normal
to ι(M) in Rn and thus the mean displacement has a normal component that encodes the curvature of the
manifold; in section 4.2 we introduce two estimators that remove this normal component, allowing you to
reconstruct the underlying dynamics.
B.6
ODK Parameter Optimisation Scheme
In this appendix, we will describe how to analytically compute the gradients of the transient objective, Lq,
and the negative log-likelihood objective, Lp, both computed as:
Lq(Φ; λreg) = −1
m
m
X
i=1
log ˆq(xi) + λregR(Φ) + constant
(B.54)
Lp(Φ; λreg) = −1
m
m
X
i=1
log ˆp(ti, xi) + +λregR(Φ) + constant
(B.55)
where m = |D|, and λreg is a hyperparameter controlling the strength of the regularisation function R(Φ).
We will not talk much about how one might compute the gradient of the regularisation function since we
leave this free for the reader to choose. However, for the gradient and Laplacian regularisations we introduce
in section 4.3, they are computed as:
Rgrad(f) = 1
m
m
X
i=1
(fNi −fi1kreg)T Gi(fNi −fi1kreg),
Rlap(f) = 1
m∥Lregf∥2
(B.56)
where: Ni is a precomputed set of indices for the kreg nearest neighbours to xi (not including xi itself),
and 1kreg is a vector of kreg 1’s; and Lreg is an appropriately normalised and fixed Laplacian matrix (thus
Lf ≈∆f). We state the gradients of these regularisations as:
(∇Rgrad(f))i =
X
j|∃k:i=(Nj)k
2
 Gj(fNj −fj1Nj)

k −
X
k∈Ni
2 (Gi(fNi −fi))k
(B.57)
∇Rlap(f) = 2Lregf
(B.58)
Considering the q-objective first, we recall that we compute the estimated transient distribution through:
ˆq(xi) =
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)ps(xi) =
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)pT
0 P s
ε ei
(B.59)
where: S =
 T
ε

, ¯r(s) = r(sε)/ PS
s=1 r(sε), and ps(xi) = pT
0 P s
ε ei where (ei)j = δij. Plugging this into the
derivative of Lq we see that:
−m∂Lq
∂ϕk
=
m
X
i=1
∂
∂ϕk
log ˆq(xi) =
m
X
i=1
1
ˆq(xi)
∂
∂ϕk
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)pT
0 P s
ε ei =
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)pT
0
∂P s
ε
∂ϕk
m
X
i=1
ei
ˆq(xi) =
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)pT
0
∂P s
ε
∂ϕk
ˆq−1
(B.60)
where we write ˆq−1 = Pm
i=1
1
ˆq(xi)ei. The gradient of the matrix Pε with respect to the parameter ϕk is
done componentwise, i.e.

∂Pε
∂ϕk

ij =
∂
∂ϕk pε(xi, xj), as a result we can expand the derivative of the matrix
exponent, P s
ε , as:
∂P s
ε
∂ϕk
= P s−1
ε
∂Pε
∂ϕk
+ ∂P s−1
ε
∂ϕk
Pε = P s−1
ε
∂Pε
∂ϕk
+ P s−2
ε
∂Pε
∂ϕk
Pε + ∂P s−2
ε
∂ϕk
P 2
ε =
s−1
X
t=0
P t
ε
∂Pε
∂ϕk
P s−1−t
ε
(B.61)
86


which is in terms of powers of Pε and ∂Pε
∂ϕk , only. We can plug this back into equation (B.60) to get:
−m∂Lq
∂ϕk
=
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)
s−1
X
t=0
pT
0 P t
ε
∂Pε
∂ϕk
P s−1−t
ε
ˆq−1 =
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)
s−1
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
ˆws−1−t
(B.62)
where ˆwt := P t
ε ˆq−1. We see from this expression that to compute the gradient analytically we need only
compute pt and vt for t = 0, 1, . . . , S −1, which can be done in a single forward pass (and indeed the pt’s
will already have been calculated to compute the objective function) and then factor these vectors through
∂Pε
∂ϕk .
To compute the analytic gradient of the Lp objective is slightly more complicated but follows the same
structure. We proceed initially by defining ˆp(ti, xi) = pT
0 P si
ε ei where si =
 ti
ε

, then we write the derivative
of the objective as:
−m∂Lp
∂ϕk
=
m
X
i=1
∂
∂ϕk
log ˆp(ti, xi) =
m
X
i=1
1
ˆp(ti, xi)
∂
∂ϕk
ˆp(ti, xi) =
m
X
i=1
pT
0
∂P si
ε
∂ϕk
ei
psi(xi) =
m
X
i=1
si−1
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
P si−1−t
ε
ei
psi(xi)
(B.63)
The difficulty here is that we cannot swap the order of the state sum and the time sum as we did before
since the limits of the time sum depend on si. The trick to get around this problem is to sum from 0 to
S −1 regardless but mask away unwanted terms with a characteristic function, i.e.:
−m∂Lp
∂ϕk
=
m
X
i=1
S−1
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
P si−1−t
ε
ei
psi(xi)1(t ≤si −1) =
S−1
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
wt
(B.64)
where wt is defined as:
wt :=
m
X
i=1
P si−1−t
ε
ei
psi(xi)1(t ≤si −1) =
S
X
s=1
X
i:si=s
P s−1−t
ε
ei
psi(xi)1(t ≤s −1) =
S
X
s=t+1
X
i:si=s
P s−1−t
ε
ei
psi(xi)
(B.65)
and satisfies the following recursive relationship:
wt = Pεwt+1 +
X
i:si−1=t
ei
psi(xi)
(B.66)
From this recursion relation we see that if we take the sum given in equation (B.64) backwards (from S −1
to 0) then we can compute ∂Lp
∂ϕk through a single forward pass (as with the Lq objective).
We can generalise the Lp objective to work with a linearly interpolated probability, ˆp(ti, xi) = aipsi−1(xi)+
bipsi(xi) where ai = 1 −
 si −ti
ε

and bi = si −ti
ε . From equation (B.64) that:
−m∂Lp
∂ϕk
=
m
X
i=1
ai
ˆp(ti, xi)
∂
∂ϕk
psi−1(xi) +
bi
ˆp(ti, xi)
∂
∂ϕk
psi(xi) =
m
X
i=1
si−2
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
P si−2−t
ε
ai
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.67)
+
si−1
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
P si−1−t
ε
bi
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.68)
using the same trick as before we define:
wa
t =
m
X
i=1
P si−2−t
ε
ai
ˆp(ti, xi)ei1(t ≤si −2) =
S
X
s=t+2
X
i:si=s
P s−2−t
ε
ai
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.69)
wb
t =
m
X
i=1
P si−1−t
ε
bi
ˆp(ti, xi)ei1(t ≤si −1) =
S
X
s=t+1
X
i:si=s
P s−1−t
ε
bi
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.70)
87


which again satisfy the recursion relations:
wa
t = Pεwa
t+1 +
X
i:si−2=t
ai
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.71)
wb
t = Pεwb
t+1 +
X
i:si−1=t
bi
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.72)
Letting wa+b
t
= wa
t + wb
t we have:
wa+b
t
= Pεwa+b
t+1 +
X
i:si−2=t
ai
ˆp(ti, xi)ei +
X
i:si−1=t
bi
ˆp(ti, xi)ei
(B.73)
Putting all this together we find that:
−m∂Lp
∂ϕk
=
S−2
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
wa
t +
S−1
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
wb
t = pT
S−1
∂Pε
∂ϕk
wb
S−1 +
S−2
X
t=0
pT
t
∂Pε
∂ϕk
wa+b
t
(B.74)
So just as before we can compute the gradient in a single forward pass.
All of the above requires the analytic computation of ∂Pε
∂ϕk , and this depends on the ODK Kε and the
form of the normalisation of Pε in terms of Kε. The elements of the normalised transition operator Pε take
the form:
Pij := (Pε)ij = K(xi, xj)
Z(xi)q(xj),
where:
Z(xi) =
m
X
j=1
K(xi, xj)
q(xj)
(B.75)
where we drop the ε subscript of Pε for notational clarity. As a result, the (i, j)th component of the derivative
of Pε takes the form:
∂Pij
∂ϕk
=
1
Ziqj
∂Kij
∂ϕk
−Kij
Z2
i qj
m
X
n=1
1
qn
∂Kin
∂ϕk
= Pij
Kij
∂Kij
∂ϕk
−Pij
m
X
n=1
Pin
Kin
∂Kin
∂ϕk
(B.76)
= Pij
"
∂log(Kij)
∂ϕk
−
m
X
n=1
Pin
∂log(Kin)
∂ϕk
#
(B.77)
which is in terms of the normalised transition operator Pε and the natural logarithm of the raw ODK
Kε.
The presence of the natural logarithm points us towards using the prototypical kernel, i.e.
where
h(u) = exp(−u/2), therefore we consider the ODK:
Kij := Kε(xi, xj) = exp
 
−D2
ij
2ερ2
i
−(lj −li −εκiτi)2
2εκ2
i ρ2
i
+ (lj −li)2
2εκ2
i ρ2
i
!
(B.78)
where we use subscripts, fi, to denote evaluation of a function f(x) at the sample indexed by i in D, i.e.
fi = f(xi), and where Dij = ∥xi −xj∥. Since the ODK, Kij, given in equation (B.78), has a rigid structure
in terms of the input functions τ(x), ρ(x) and l(x) we can compute the derivative of log(Kij) with respect
to any ϕk (where ϕ = τ, ρ, l) analytically. We first write log(Kij) as:
log(Kij) = −D2
ij
2ερ2
i
+
τi
κiρ2
i
(lj −li) −ετ 2
i
2ρ2
i
(B.79)
then we can read of the derivatives of log(Kij) with respect to τk, ρk and lk, before plugging the result back
into equation (B.77) to compute the respective derivatives with respect to Pij:
∂log(Kij)
∂τk
= (lj −li −εκiτi)
κiρ2
i
δki
=⇒
∂Pij
∂τk
= Pij
κiρ2
i
 
lj −
m
X
n=1
Pinln
!
δki
(B.80)
∂log(Kij)
∂ρk
= −2
ρi
log(Kij)δki
=⇒
∂Pij
∂ρk
= 2Pij
ρi
 m
X
n=1
Pin log(Kin) −log(Kij)
!
δki
(B.81)
∂log(Kij)
∂lk
=
τi
κiρ2
i
(δkj −δki)
=⇒
∂Pij
∂lk
=
τi
κiρ2
i
Pij (δkj −Pik)
(B.82)
88


When ϕ = τ, ρ we notice that the only row of ∂Pε
∂ϕk that is not identically zero will be the kth row, and thus
we can define:
dPε
dϕ =
m
X
k=1
∂Pε
∂ϕk
(B.83)
as a method to store all derivative information in a single matrix. We could also re-write the full derivative
of the Lq and Lp objectives as:
−mdLq
dϕ =
S
X
s=1
¯r(s)
s−1
X
t=0
pT
t Diag
dPε
dϕ ˆωs−1−t

(B.84)
−mdLp
dϕ =
S−1
X
t=0
pT
t Diag
dPε
dϕ ωt

(B.85)
But in practice, we do not compute the gradient using the diagonal matrices, but we do store all gradient
information in a single matrix. This wouldn’t work when ϕ = l, but if you were training for the ordering you
would naturally set τ(x) and κ(x) to be constants, so every iteration you would just have to invert ρ(x)2 to
compute gradients with respect to l, since we notice in equation (B.82) that we do not have any costly sums
over the rows of Pε as we do in equations (B.80) & (B.81), and thus require us to precompute and store the
derivatives at the beginning of our calculations.
B.6.1
Laplacian Eigenfunction Decomposition
In an attempt to enforce smoothness without adding constraints to the differential structure of dynamic
parameters in our ODK as is done when using gradient or Laplacian regularisation given in equations (102)
& (103), respectively. We can compute a basis of functions that will naturally be smooth. In the spirit of
this paper, and with reference to the work of Coifman & Lafon in Diffusion Maps [21], we will extract the
top K eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator on M by using a symmetric (diffusion maps) kernel
with the form:
P sym
ε
(xi, xj) =
Ksym
ε
(xi, xj)q(xj)−1
Pm
k=1 Kε(xi, xk)q(xk)−1 ,
with:
Ksym
ε
(xi, xj) = h
∥xi −xj∥2
ε

(B.86)
Which is an ODK with no ordering and ρ ≡1, and by Theorem 3.1 (or equivalently, by Theorem 2, Pg. 15,
of [21]), we know that:
lim
ε→0 ε−1(P sym
ε
−I)f(x) = 1
2σ2
h∆f
(B.87)
In the examples given in section 4.3, we take h(u) = exp(u/2), which makes the right-hand side of equation
(B.87), equal 1
2. We can write P sym
ε
as P sym
ε
= D−1
L D−1
R Ksym
ε
D−1
R , where Ksym
ε
is the matrix of pairwise un-
normalised kernel evaluations, DR = Diag(q) for the sampling density q(x), and DL = Diag(D−1
R Ksym
ε
D−1
R 1).
We note that introducing the first DR on the left, diverges from the usual form of the symmetric transition
matrix, but since this simply scales each row by q−1
i
, and (DL)ii equals the sum of the ith row, this additional
term immediately cancels and we are left with the standard transition matrix given in equation (B.86). We
now define the symmetrised transition matrix as:
¯P sym
ε
:= D1/2
L P sym
ε
D−1/2
L
= D−1/2
L
D−1
R Ksym
ε
D−1
R D−1/2
L
(B.88)
since the kernel matrix Ksym
ε
is, by construction symmetric, so too will ¯P sym
ε
. We now note that if φk is an
eigenvector of ¯P sym
ε
with eigenvalue λk, i.e. P sym
ε
φk = λkφk, then vk := D1/2
L φk satisfies:
¯P sym
ε
vk = D1/2
L P sym
ε
D−1/2
L
vk = D1/2
L P sym
ε
φk = λkD1/2
L φk = λkvk
(B.89)
the reverse is also true, that being that if vk is an eigenvector of ¯P sym
ε
with eigenvalue λk then φk = D−1/2
L
vk is
an eigenvector of P sym
ε
with the same eigenvalue. It is of practical importance to formulate this in terms of the
symmetrised transition matrix since it is far more computationally stable to compute the eigendecomposition
89


of a symmetric matrix than an asymmetric matrix. Thus, after computing an eigendecomposition of the
¯P sym
ε
, we can take the top K eigenvectors, corresponding the K largest eigenvalues of ¯P sym
ε
, and then
form the basis B = {φ1, . . . , φK}. All the eigenvalues of ¯P sym
ε
are in the range (0, 1] (as was shown, for
example, in [20]), thus for a given value of ε, all the eigenvalues of Lsym
ε
= ε−1(P sym
ε
−I) lie in the range
(−1/ε, 0]
ε→0
−−−→(−∞, 0]. Since Lsym
ε
ε→0
−−−→∆we know that we can interpret the eigenvectors of Lsym
ε
as being
harmonics, with their corresponding eigenvalues being their frequency (where frequency controls variability
over M).
Thus, by taking the top K eigenfunctions, we approximate a basis of functions that is both
smooth and not overly variable (rapid variability is effectively the definition of not being smooth when one
is restricted to discrete data).
It is important to note that although the eigenvectors of ¯P sym
ε
are orthogonal (by the spectral theory of
symmetric matrices), the transformed eigenvectors of P sym
ε
instead satisfy:
⟨φi, φj⟩L2(M,q) ≈φiDLφj = vT
i D−1/2
L
DLD−1/2
L
vj = ⟨vi, vj⟩2 = δij
(B.90)
So, unless the data is uniformly distributed, we are not guaranteed that φk’s will be orthogonal. Thus, for
practical reasons, we often orthogonalise B using the classical Gram-Schmidt algorithm [58].
Once we have a basis of eigenfunctions, B, we can parametrise l(x), τ(x) or ρ(x) as:
τ(x) =
K
X
k=1
ατ
kφk(x),
l(x) =
K
X
k=2
αl
kφk(x),
ρ(x) = exp
 K
X
k=1
αρ
kφk(x)
!
.
(B.91)
where τ(x) is simply a weighted sum of all K eigenfunctions, l(x) is a weighted sum of all but the trivial
(constant) eigenfunction (thus building into the parametrisation our knowledge that ODKs are invariant
to addition by a constant), and ρ(x) is the exponential of the weighted sum of all K eigenfunctions. The
purpose of log-transforming the ρ’s is to ensure the noise is bounded away from zero; other functions could
also be used to enforce positivity, such as x2 + ρmin, but while testing we found the ρ = exp(·) to be the
most reliable. We could also consider taking the modulus, ReLU, or exponential of our decomposition for
τ(x) since if we have fixed the ordering we might want to stop the process from going backwards.
Other than acting as an almost parameter-free smoothness regularisation, taking a Laplacian eigenbasis
also massively reduces the number of parameters that we have to optimise for, thus improving the stability
and rate of convergence of both our Lq and Lp optimisation problems. In figure 7, Panels B and E show
the results of applying this parameterisation framework to data sampled from the NL process of section
4.3, we can see that the estimate is still relatively noisy indicating our choice of K = 250 was too high,
but we also see that upon smoothing we have very nearly perfectly captured the true noise function. This
is noteworthy because the gradient- and Laplacian-regularised optimisation didn’t capture this structure as
faithfully, showing that the signal was weak enough that even a small amount of additional regularisation was
enough to distort the minima; thus, using a Laplacian eigendecomposition might allow us to more faithfully
reconstruct the weak signal from the diffusion in the data.
We note that, as discussed in section 3.2.1, we could replace the symmetric diffusion maps kernel with a
symmetric variable bandwidth kernel:
KS
ε (xi, xj) = h
∥xi −xj∥2
ερ(x)ρ(y)

(B.92)
which would still allow for us to stably take an eigendecomposition and adapts better to inhomogeneously
sampled data, and indeed converges to (a drifted version of) the Laplacian at a faster rate, see [10] for more
details.
B.7
Identifiability of Drift and Diffusion Coefficients
Recovering the drift and diffusion from data sampled from an SDE is a classical inverse problem and is central
to many applied domains. However, it is not obvious whether the problems we pose for our optimisers to
solve are well-posed; the theory of identifiability for these problems seeks to answer the question of whether,
given some idealised form of our data, it would be theoretically possible to infer the exact parameters of
our underlying process; more precisely, let P = {Pθ : θ ∈Θ} be the set of all possible models we could
90


learn given the parameter space Θ, then — under the assumption that our model is expressive enough to
represent the observed realities — if the mapping from θ 7→Pθ is injective (i.e. Pθ1 = Pθ2
=⇒θ1 = θ2
for all θ1, θ2 ∈Θ) then our model is said to be identifiable (see [57], Chapter 1, Definition 5.2). We are to
imagine this as follows: under the assumption that, given some data D, our model can learn the optimal
parameterisation, then if our problem is identifiable, our learned model will be a faithful representation of
the underlying system.
For the inference of parameters for SDEs, the difficulty of this identifiability problem depends on the data
modalities available. For example, if sample paths (samples of whole trajectories) are observed, then the
quadratic variation along these trajectories will determine the diffusion coefficients, and the Kramers-Moyal
expansion will determine the drift. However, if we are not able to sample trajectories, and can instead only
sample independent snapshots of the process — which is the canonical setting of scRNA-seq data, where
in order to measure the gene expression of a cell you must destroy it — then the problem of parameter
identifiability is tremendously important as fundamentally our problem may be ill-posed and we would not
wish to expend energy on a futile problem. It is datasets of this sort that we wished to study in this paper
— principally, we aimed to design a kernel which was theoretically well-posed to represent the underlying
dynamics of data generated by a stochastic process, but could be easily tuned and reparametrised by users.
From the perspective of identifiability, we have a fundamentally under-determined problem; writting the
Fokker-Planck equation in divergence form ∂tpt = −∇· Jt, where Jt = µpt −1
2∇(σ2pt) is the probability
current, we can see that observations of the marginals will only determine Jt up to the addition of a
divergence-free field, and hence drift and diffusion may be exchanged without altering {pt}t∈[0,T ]. To make
progress with such problems, we need to make some structural restrictions; for example, restricting the drift
to be generated by a potential b = −∇U allows us to avoid the divergence-free gauge freedom since non-linear
gradients cannot generate divergence-free terms.
The theory of identifiability for gradient-flow SDEs with constant isotropic diffusions is now relatively
complete, with parameters being identifiable, under various sets of constraints, from the observation of as
few as three time marginals. If one has a known, or highly constrained, diffusion, then it has been (see, for
example, [42]) that the potential is recoverable from time marginals; Lavenant et al. [55] established that
the full law on paths is identified through a minimum-entropy variational principle, with a single sample per
time point sufficing when the measurement times are dense in [0, T]; Chizat et al. [19] designed a convergent
mean-field Langevin algorithm which was later extended by Neklyudov et al. [63] to time-inhomogeneous
known diffusivity. More relevant to our own work is the result of Guan et al. [39] who showed that a gradient-
flow SDE with unknown constant isotropic diffusion is jointly identifiable if and only if your observations
occur out of steady state, and furthermore, one only needs to observe three time marginals to guarantee
uniqueness.
Our Lq objective, given in equation (100), would likely only be identifiable in this restricted domain of
gradient flows and constant isotropic diffusions, but we note that our assumptions are significantly weaker
than knowing all time marginals. We assume that we know the initial distribution p0(x), the time-sampling
distribution r(t), and the transient sampling distribution q(x) =
R T
0 r(t)
R
X0 pt(x|x0)p0(x0)dx0dt. To show
identifiability, we must show that given two processes have the same initial condition, they can only produce
the same transient distribution if they have identical time-marginals for all t ∈[0, T], which then by the
result of Guan et al., we know that the processes must be identical. This might not be as infeasible as it first
seems, since the gradient dynamics precludes recurrence and thus if our model is to add probability to the
estimated transient distribution at a given sample x, it only really has one chance to do so — i.e. it must add
all the required probability exactly when the probability is flowing through this point. Furthermore, every
path evolved up to some t ∈[0, T] will have quadratic variation equal to tσ2, so if this diffusion isn’t properly
tuned, the model’s estimated variability will be incongruous with the observed data. Thus, we conjecture
that the spread of our observed data determines the magnitude of the diffusion, and the geometry determines
the drift; by constraining ourselves to gradient-flow SDEs with constant isotropic diffusion we believe, as
with existing results, these determining factors separate cleanly, giving us some form of identifiability.
However, if we wish to relax the condition of constant isotropic noise, the problem becomes significantly
more challenging, as the signals from the drift and diffusion can begin to mix together and one’s model must
not only be able to identify the correct regime, but then at the finer scale, must untangle the balance between
the drift and diffusion. As we have mentioned several times in the main text, when the diffusion is state-
dependent, you effectively introduce an effective advection term originating from the diffusion; considering
91


the Fokker-Planck equation ∂tpt = L∗pt, we have:
∂tpt = −∇·
 µ −1
2∇σ2
pt

+ 1
2∇· (σ2∇pt)
(B.93)
Hence, the model must be able to isolate by which mechanism the probability is pushed forward. A real
experimental demonstration of this was given by Hoffmann et al. [48] who showed that one could model
the gene expression of a differentiating stem cell — a process usually modeled with ODEs — using an
entirely diffusive model; thus, if your system is likely generated by a process with state-dependent noise,
then understanding when you can, or cannot, reasonably identify ones parameters is critical. We can also see
how state-dependent noise produces issues with identifiability by assuming that L∗
1 and L∗
2 are two distinct
forward operators that give rise to identical time-marginals, then it must be true that (L∗
1 −L∗
2)pt ≡0;
when diffusion is constant Guan et al. exploit the fact that the diffusions factor outside of the Laplacian
as
1
2(σ2
1 −σ2
2)∆pt, and we may assume that σ1 > σ2 as otherwise previously mentioned identifiability
results for known diffusions would guarantee the potentials be equal [55]; now since the residual diffusion
is non-degenerate and the residual drift −∇(Ψ1 −Ψ2) is Lipschitz and satisfies linear growth, thus we can
instantiate a uniqueness result from PDE theory (namely, Theorem 4.1.6, of [15]) to prove that pt = p0
for all t ∈[0, T] which contradicts the system not being in steady state. However, if we cannot make this
factorisation, we have one PDE, namely 0 = (L∗
1 −L∗
2)pt, in two unknowns, giving us an underdetermined
PDE which precludes the application of existing uniqueness results for PDEs. It was shown by Cristofol
et al. [23] that a general univariate SDE is identifiable if one observes the time evolution of the first- and
second-order moments over some time interval; this result is intuitive given our previous discussion since we
are now trying to derive uniqueness from two PDEs in terms of the forward operators, (L1 −L2)xt = 0 and
(L1 −L2)x2
t = 0.
Our Lp objective is posed towards this significantly more challenging problem where one has state-
dependent noise; furthermore, we still assume that we have relatively little dynamical information, namely,
it is assumed that we know the initial time-marginal p0(x), and we observe independent samples of trajectories
and when, along these trajectories, they were sampled. As a result, we have effectively observed the transient
distribution q(x), the time sampling distribution, r(t), and a very noisy representation of the joint distribution
p(x, t). The results we obtained from applying the Lp objective to data sampled from the highly complex NL
process showed empirically that we can faithfully reconstruct the first-order deterministic dynamics while
simultaneously approximating the diffusion. However, our estimates of the diffusion were highly noisy, and
the functional changes observed by introducing a very small smoothness regularisation indicate that the
signal from the diffusion, given this objective, is very weak, but nonetheless it is present. In Panel F of
figure 7, we show the ground truth and estimated noise functions plotted against the ground truth ordering
function (which gives us a measure of how far along the process we are), we observe that our Laplacian
Eigenbasis estimate, although noisy, very faithfully captures the noise (after some ad hoc smoothing), even
features that would seem unimportant given the form of our objective, i.e. the small but sharp increase in
diffusion outside of ∥x∥> 2π. However, this estimate was highly noisy and required ad hoc smoothing to
appreciate that it really had captured the signal from the diffusion; this indicates that the loss landscape
is very flat around the minima, which we interpret as evidence of some weak identifiability. The objective
function is isolating the noise by using ODKs to numerically integrate the Fokker-Planck equation; given
that we observe sampling times, if the path integral of the diffusion has been too small, then the observed
uncertainty in the sampling times would be misaligned with the numerical integration. Thus, we conjecture
that the Lp objective, computed by numerically integrating ODKs, is capable of untangling deterministic and
stochastic contributions to the dynamics by adaptively matching the mean-field dynamics and the uncertainty
in sampling times. It is not clear if this is sufficient in general, but it may provide some evidence that,
potentially with additional constraints, that gradient-flow SDEs with state-dependent isotropic diffusions
are identifiable from observations of the joint distribution p(x, t) and the initial distribution p0(x), under
the assumption that the process is not in steady-state — it may be required that we assume that the time-
sampling distribution has a specific form, such as uniform or exponentially distribution; it also may be
necessary to assume that one knows the steady-state distribution and this is reached at time T, i.e. we also
may need to know pT (x). The assumption that one is not in steady-state is essential, since otherwise the
SDE dxt = −∇Ψ(xt)dt + σdwt, and the rescaled SDE dyt = −α∇Ψ(xt)dt + √ασdwt, would have identical
time-marginals, and thus one has a counterexample for identifiability.
92
