Generative Diffusion Surrogates with Analytical Variance Schedule
Patrick Reichherzer1,2,3*, Gianluca Gregori1, David N. Hosking4,5, Subir Sarkar1
1Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK.
2Department of Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA.
3Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Bochum 44799, Germany.
4Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3
0WA, UK.
5Gonville & Caius College, Cambridge CB2 1TA, UK.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: p.reichherzer@princeton.edu;
Abstract
Stochastic transport describes physical systems in which an initially structured distribution spreads under unresolved
forcing, scattering, or heterogeneous media. Useful surrogates for such systems should be probabilistic, time-resolved, and
able to represent non-Gaussian distributional structure. Generative diffusion models, which corrupt data with Gaussian
noise and learn a reverse flow back to structured states, have these properties. Their noise schedules, however, are usually
chosen heuristically: image and audio generation—the canonical use cases—provide no physical clock. In transport, by
contrast, the variance, or mean-square displacement, is often known from macroscopic theory or empirical scaling even
when the full distribution is not. Here we prescribe the forward noising rate as the time derivative of this variance,
turning generative time into a calibrated transport clock. The variance path is enforced by construction, while the learned
score field represents how non-Gaussian structure inherited from entrance data is smoothed along that path, requiring no
intermediate-time physical transport data. For ballistic-to-diffusive transport in turbulent plasmas, the surrogate matches
test-particle distributions, reproduces the laboratory-measured variance scale, and tracks the simulated kurtosis evolution
without schedule tuning, enabling calibrated emulation and likelihood-based inference.
1 Introduction
Generative diffusion models—as widely used in AI image,
audio and video generation—work by learning to undo noise.
Their forward diffusion process corrupts training data by
successive addition of random noise. A neural network is
trained to reverse this corruption, so that a highly corrupted
sample—even pure noise—can be transformed into a sample
resembling the training data (reverse diffusion process). In
this paper, we use the same machinery to model physical
systems that evolve by the physical accumulation of random
increments, i.e., stochastic transport, in which an initially
organized distribution is acted on by unresolved fluctuations
such as turbulent magnetic fields, scattering centers, porous
heterogeneities, molecular collisions, or random forcing.
A central design choice in diffusion models is the for-
ward noise schedule g(τ), which specifies the amount of
noise added in the forward diffusion process as a function
of a time-like parameter τ [21, 25, 33, 38]. For the variance-
exploding (VE) formulation used in this work, the forward
corruption is
dxτ = ˜g(τ) dWτ,
(1)
where Wτ is a standard Wiener process with independent
increments. If ˜σ2(τ) denotes the accumulated post-entrance
variance increment of the surrogate, then
˜σ2(τ) =
Z τ
0
˜g2(u) du,
˜g2(τ) = d
dτ ˜σ2(τ).
(2)
Thus, a nondecreasing macroscopic variance law directly
determines the instantaneous noising rate of the diffusion
model.
In image, audio and video generation, g(τ) is usually
chosen heuristically (e.g., linear or cosine in τ [21, 33]), and
tuned to maximize output quality or likelihood. For stochas-
tic transport, by contrast, the variance, interpreted as the
mean-square displacement of transported particles, is often
known more directly than the full distribution, either from
macroscopic transport theory or from measured scaling laws.
Examples include non-Fickian transport in porous media,
modeled via fractional kinetics [7, 15]; intracellular subdiffu-
sion in crowded cytoplasm [18, 45]; superdiffusive dispersion
in turbulence (Richardson’s law) [37]; and charged-particle
transport in stochastic magnetic fields. Analogous scaling
laws also arise in broader stochastic-spreading problems
1
arXiv:2609.01705v1  [cs.LG]  1 Sep 2026


such as human mobility and rough volatility [9, 17]. Treat-
ing τ as a normalized physical time, such a law can be
written as ˜σ2(τ) and used to calibrate the diffusion-model
clock at the level of the variance.
In this work, we therefore consider generative diffu-
sion models with the noise schedule ˜g(τ) anchored to
a known physical variance law ˜σ2(τ) as surrogates for
stochastic transport. Anchoring the variance separates the
scale dynamics from the remaining distributional shape:
the variance is prescribed analytically, while the learned
reverse model represents higher-order structure, including
non-Gaussian structure inherited from the entrance data.
This calibration fixes the ensemble spreading at the vari-
ance level, but not the underlying microscopic dynamics:
the synthetic Gaussian noising process does not, by itself,
impose finite propagation speed, memory effects, or trajec-
tory correlations. Figure 1 summarizes the mapping between
diffusion-model and stochastic-transport terminology used
throughout this work.
This variance-clock construction differs from existing
uses of generative models in scientific surrogate model-
ing. Diffusion models are increasingly used as scientific
surrogates [20, 40] including to synthesize particle trajecto-
ries from test-particle simulations [31], but their generative
timescale is typically algorithmic, where the forward sched-
ule is chosen or tuned for objectives such as sample quality,
likelihood, or sampling efficiency [5, 13, 21, 25, 26, 38].
A separate line of scientific machine learning incorporates
physical information by penalizing residuals of governing
equations or imposing other physics-based constraints [6,
24, 35, 40]. Path-based generative methods, including flow
matching, stochastic interpolants, and Schr¨odinger bridges,
learn vector fields or stochastic processes along prescribed
probability paths between distributions [1, 4, 12, 14, 30].
These paths need not coincide with the physical trans-
port clock, although trajectory data or physical interpolants
can be incorporated in scientific applications [44]. Other
approaches solve inverse problems by approximately revers-
ing a simulator and correcting the result with a learned
score [22].
Operationally, we modify only the scalar schedule in the
standard VE-SDE framework [38]. The schedule ˜g2(τ) is
derived directly from the macroscopic variance law ˜σ2(τ),
calibrating the generative clock to physical time at the level
of the second moment. This preserves existing diffusion-
model infrastructure while enabling analytic moment track-
ing. It also permits entrance-only training: the network is
trained using entrance samples and their synthetic corrup-
tions along the prescribed variance path without requiring
physical transport data at intermediate times. Sampling at
a prescribed readout time τ ⋆therefore gives the surrogate
marginal associated with ˜σ2(τ ⋆).
In the following, we develop a framework for integrat-
ing macroscopic transport laws into generative diffusion
models. We provide the theoretical basis in § 2.1, apply
the method to telegraph-type ballistic-to-diffusive transport
in § 2.2, demonstrate entrance-only training in § 2.3, and
use the learned model as a differentiable surrogate for lab-
oratory plasma transport in § 2.4. In § 2.5, we apply the
Fig. 1 Diffusion–transport terminology map. Individual curves
show sample trajectories xτ; the blue density field shows the evolving
marginal pτ. A fixed-τ slice is interpreted as a distribution over noised
images in diffusion modeling and as the beam one-particle probability
density function in stochastic transport, connecting the entrance/data
distribution P0 to the Gaussianized limit P1.
same construction to heavy-tailed and intermittent trans-
port, where early-time transport statistics are strongly
non-Gaussian. The resulting surrogate is indexed by phys-
ical time and is suitable for calibrated scientific emulation
and likelihood-based inference.
2


2 Results
2.1 Central Limit Theorem motivates
physics-anchored Gaussian surrogates
In many physical systems, macroscopic transport arises from
the accumulation of microscopic perturbations, such as scat-
tering events or stochastic collisions, that are correlated
over a finite length scale ℓc or, equivalently, a correlation
time τc. Below this scale, the microphysics may be complex
and strongly non-Gaussian. If coarse-grained perturbations
separated by ℓc are weakly dependent and have finite second
moment, the central limit theorem (CLT) motivates a Gaus-
sian approximation to the accumulated transport kernel at
scales large compared with ℓc. After N ∼τ/τc approxi-
mately decorrelated contributions on the normalized clock
with finite fourth moment, standardized higher cumulants
relax; in particular, the excess kurtosis of the accumulated
kernel falls as 1/N (Methods, § 4.3).
We use this Gaussianization as a coarse-grained mod-
eling assumption. Sub-ℓc non-Gaussian structure is repre-
sented through the entrance distribution P0, while subse-
quent post-entrance spreading is approximated by a Gaus-
sian kernel whose variance is prescribed by the macroscopic
transport law. Thus non-Gaussian structure in the model
marginals is inherited from P0 and then diluted by the pre-
scribed variance growth, unless the physical transport kernel
itself remains strongly non-Gaussian. We exploit this con-
struction in § 2.5 to propagate intermittency from sub-ℓc
field statistics, while the anchored variance law supplies the
scale evolution.
The Gaussianized spreading above ℓc is encoded by the
accumulated post-entrance variance ˜σ2(τ). If a macroscopic
law is written for the total variance, then ˜σ2(τ) should be
read as the variance increment relative to the entrance vari-
ance. We implement this variance increment using the VE
process introduced in Eqs. (1)–(2), now initialized with
x0 ∼P0.
With Cov[dWτ] = I dτ, the resulting marginal law at each
fixed τ can equivalently be written as
xτ = x0 + ˜σ(τ)ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, I).
Each synthetic Gaussian increment represents the coarse-
grained, decorrelated part of the transport only at the level
of the surrogate. The Markov approximation amounts to
neglecting memory beyond τc in these coarse-grained incre-
ments. The marginal distribution pτ(x) generated by Eq. (1)
is therefore the convolution of P0 with a Gaussian kernel
(Methods, § 4.1). Starting from P0, each state accumulates
independent Gaussian displacement with per-coordinate
variance ˜σ2(τ):
pτ(x) = (P0 ∗N(0, ˜σ2(τ)I))(x).
(3)
Thus the total per-coordinate variance of the model
marginal is σ2
0 + ˜σ2(τ), where σ2
0 = Var(P0) denotes the
entrance variance.
The VE process therefore acts as a Gaussian surrogate
for the post-entrance transport kernel. When the physical
transport kernel is centered and isotropic, this Gaussian
is the moment-matched member of the centered isotropic
Gaussian family and minimizes cross-entropy within that
family (equivalently, forward KL when the physical ker-
nel has a density and finite differential entropy) (Meth-
ods, § 4.2). The associated score is s(x, τ) = ∇x log pτ(x),
which we approximate by a neural network sθ. Because the
variance is enforced analytically by the schedule, this net-
work is not required to learn the second-moment evolution.
Instead, it represents the modeled evolution of the remain-
ing distributional shape, including non-Gaussian structure
inherited from P0. The trained score field makes the sur-
rogate useful for inversion and likelihood-based inference
(see § 2.3).
The Gaussian convolution (3) yields a closed-form relax-
ation of entrance kurtosis. We quantify tail heaviness using
the excess kurtosis K := κ4/σ4, where κ4 is the fourth
cumulant; a Gaussian has K = 0, while heavy-tailed distri-
butions have K > 0. Let K0 be the entrance excess kurtosis.
Because the Gaussian kernel contributes no fourth cumu-
lant, the fourth cumulant of the model marginal is inherited
from P0, while the variance grows as σ2
0 + ˜σ2(τ). The model
excess kurtosis therefore relaxes deterministically as
KM(τ) = K0

σ2
0
σ2
0 + ˜σ2(τ)
2
,
(4)
entirely governed by the anchored variance path ˜σ2(τ).
For centered transport, the mean and variance are fixed
by construction. The residual mismatch between the phys-
ical kernel and the Gaussian surrogate therefore lies in
unresolved distributional shape, including higher cumulants
when they exist. We quantify the leading mismatch rele-
vant here using the kurtosis gap, defined in Methods, § 4.3,
Eq. (11).
2.2 Variance laws as noise schedules
In the coarse-grained picture of § 2.1, τc separates corre-
lated from approximately decorrelated perturbations. For
telegraph-type transport, the same relaxation scale sepa-
rates two transport regimes. Here and below, τc is expressed
on the same normalized clock as τ. Unlike ordinary Fick-
ian diffusion, where the accumulated variance grows linearly
(˜σ2 ∝τ), many real systems show a ballistic-to-diffusive
transition.
The two regimes have distinct signatures. At short times
(τ ≪τc), correlations persist: the direction or velocity has
not yet decorrelated, so displacements grow coherently. This
is the ballistic regime, where variance grows quadratically
(˜σ2 ∝τ 2). Once τ ≫τc, many approximately independent
perturbations have accumulated and the variance grows
linearly (˜σ2 ∝τ). This is the ordinary diffusive regime.
A minimal model for this crossover is the Goldstein–
Kac, or telegraph, process [19]. In one dimension, a particle
moves at finite speed c while its direction decorrelates on a
3


correlation time tc. In dimensional variables, the correspond-
ing density q(x, t) satisfies, up to convention-dependent
normalizations of tc,
∂2q
∂t2 + 1
tc
∂q
∂t = c2 ∂2q
∂x2 .
(5)
The second-order time derivative yields finite-speed, per-
sistent transport with ordinary diffusion as its long-time,
large-scale limit.
In this work we do not use the full telegraph kernel as
the VE surrogate kernel. We use only its mean-square dis-
placement to define the variance clock. For a point source
with symmetric initial velocities, the post-entrance variance
increment has the form
⟨x2(t)⟩= 2D
h
t −tc

1 −e−t/tci
.
After normalizing physical time by tobs, so that τ = t/tobs
and τc
= tc/tobs, and rescaling the final accumulated
variance to unity, this becomes
˜σ2(τ) = C−1 h
τ −τc

1 −e−τ/τci
,
(6)
where C = 1 −τc(1 −e−1/τc) enforces ˜σ2(1) = 1.
Applying the anchoring principle (2), the VE noise
schedule is
˜g2(τ) =
d
dτ ˜σ2(τ) = C−1 h
1 −e−τ/τci
.
(7)
A VE model equipped with this schedule has the pre-
scribed ballistic-to-diffusive variance crossover by construc-
tion. Figure 2 tests whether this prescribed marginal path
is realized after score training and reverse sampling, and
how it differs from common heuristic schedules and from a
finite-speed telegraph kernel.
Panel 2a compares the accumulated variance of sampled
models with the analytical telegraph prediction, plotted as
a running diffusion coefficient. The black dashed curve is
the telegraph variance law of Eq. (6); the colored curves
are empirical variances measured from generated samples.
VE-Telegraph ODE and VE-Telegraph SDE use the same
anchored schedule, Eq. (7), but different reverse samplers:
the deterministic probability-flow ODE and the stochastic
reverse SDE. VE-Linear, VE-Cosine and VE-Karras/EDM
use standard heuristic VE schedules under the same train-
ing budget. These schedules are valid generative choices,
but their parameter τ is not the telegraph physical clock, so
they do not align with the timing and shape of the ballistic-
to-diffusive crossover. The telegraph-anchored schedule is
therefore the variance law used below for the ballistic-to-
diffusive plasma application (Methods, § 4.7 and § 4.9).
Panels 2b–d test the higher-order statistics of the same
sampled marginals. The solid black curve is the closed-form
prediction of the Gaussian VE surrogate, Eq. (4); the col-
ored curves are the excess kurtosis measured from trained
sampled models for three entrance Student-t distributions.
Agreement of the VE-Telegraph ODE and VE-Telegraph
Table 1 Physical-time alignment diagnostic for the
schedule ablation (Fig. 2). For each moment we report
Q = N−1
τ
P
i(¯yi −yref
i
)2/ max[s2
i , 0.01⟨s2⟩], where ¯yi and s2
i are
the across-seed mean and variance. The statistic is evaluated at
the available logarithmically spaced readout points in
τ ∈[3 × 10−3, 1] and averaged over 10 training runs and
K0 ∈{0.5, 1.0, 1.5}. Smaller values indicate closer alignment.
Model configuration
Q (variance)
Q (kurtosis)
VE-Linear + PF-ODE
2.0 × 102
16
VE-Cosine + PF-ODE
1.7 × 104
98
VE-Karras/EDM + PF-ODE
1.3 × 105
2.6 × 102
VE-Telegraph + PF-ODE
0.34
1.5
VE-Telegraph + Rev-SDE
1.6
1.1
Kac flow + ODE
2.1
74
SDE curves with the solid line shows that the learned
score and reverse samplers reproduce the intended Gaussian-
convolution marginal path. This is the non-trivial part of the
ablation: the variance law is imposed by the scalar schedule,
but the kurtosis relaxation is not used as a training target.
The dotted black curve gives a different reference: the
variance-matched Kac/telegraph kernel derived in Meth-
ods, § 4.4. This kernel corresponds to a simple particle-level
model for the telegraph equation: a particle moves at finite
speed and changes direction at Poisson-distributed times. Its
parameters are chosen so that it has the same variance path
as Eq. (6). The comparison therefore shows that distinct
transport mechanisms can share the same variance law while
differing in their propagators, approach to the diffusive limit,
and memory [29]. The Gaussian VE surrogate and the Kac
kernel have the same mean-square displacement, but differ-
ent higher moments. The Kac/telegraph kernel has bounded
support [19] and can transiently exhibit negative excess
kurtosis. This is a controlled example of higher-cumulant
mismatch between the physical kernel and the Gaussian
VE surrogate. The departure is visible in Fig. 2b–d, most
clearly in panel c, as the gap between the dotted (Kac) and
solid (VE) theory curves.
Table
1
quantifies
these
comparisons
across
read-
out times and entrance kurtoses using a seed-normalized
squared-deviation statistic Q. The telegraph PF-ODE and
reverse-SDE samplers give the smallest deviations from
the anchored VE reference. For the Kac flow, the small
variance deviation confirms the imposed variance match,
while the larger kurtosis deviation reflects the different
higher-cumulant structure of the finite-speed kernel.
The anchoring principle (2) applies to any known, non-
decreasing variance path, whether available in closed form or
as a differentiable numerical representation. Anomalous dif-
fusion is a natural extension: for power-law scaling ˜σ2(τ) ∝
τ α, the schedule is ˜g2(τ) ∝ατ α−1 [32, 39]. This includes
subdiffusive scaling (α < 1), as in some CTRW models, and
superdiffusive scaling (α > 1); fractional Brownian motion
provides Gaussian examples with α = 2H. For α < 1, the
schedule is integrable but singular at τ = 0, so practical
implementations start from a finite τmin or regularize the
schedule near the origin. Fractional telegraph models also
admit closed-form variance expressions [34]. The practical
constraint is a finite second moment: ideal L´evy flights are
incompatible, so one anchors to a tempered or truncated law
4


Fig. 2 Schedule ablation under controlled training budget
(physics-anchored vs. heuristic schedules). a) Running diffu-
sion coefficient [˜σ2(τ) −˜σ2(0)]/τ measured from model samples as a
function of normalized time τ. Six different model configurations are
shown: three heuristic schedules (Linear, Cosine, Karras/EDM), the
Telegraph schedule (PF-ODE and reverse-SDE), and the Kac flow (a
non-VE baseline). The analytical prediction of the Telegraph equation
(Eq. (6)) is marked as a black dashed line.
b–d) Excess kurtosis K(τ) as functions of τ for three different entrance
Student-t distributions with K0 ∈{0.5, 1.0, 1.5} (black stars on the left
edge). The analytical VE prediction is shown as a black line (Eq. (4));
the dotted black line shows the Kac/telegraph reference computed from
the analytical kernel moments (Eq. (15), Methods, § 4.4). Implemen-
tation details are given in Algorithm 1. The standard deviations are
shown as colored bands around the mean values.
instead. In these cases, the VE construction should be inter-
preted as a variance-calibrated marginal surrogate, not as
a pathwise representation of the underlying non-Markovian
dynamics.
2.3 Entrance-only training and
differentiable inference
Reverse sampling in a diffusion model must start from a
terminal state in which the data structure has been washed
out. In image generation, the forward corruption is simply
run until this is the case. In our setting, the physical win-
dow closes earlier, at the detector readout τ ⋆, before the
entrance structure is gone. We therefore extend the corrup-
tion beyond the detector along the same anchored variance
law, until the accumulated variance dominates the entrance
variance. This continuation, τ ∈(τ ⋆, 1], is the virtual exten-
sion of the experiment, as illustrated in Fig. 3. It requires no
data, because corrupting entrance samples to any τ needs
only Gaussian noise of known variance. Because training
and sampling share the same τ-anchored marginals pτ, we
integrate the PF-ODE backward from the fully decorrelated
state P1 (Fig. 3c) and halt at τ ⋆, obtaining pτ ⋆without
intermediate data.
Given entrance samples, samples from pτ ⋆could also be
produced by direct forward corruption. The trained score
field supplies what direct corruption alone does not: a dif-
ferentiable transport map, PF-ODE likelihood estimates
under the terminal-density assumptions specified in Meth-
ods, gradient-based parameter inference, and model-based
backward propagation of observed detector ensembles to
earlier times. The model is therefore best viewed as a
stochastic propagator of distributions.
The physics-anchored schedule ensures that the model
marginals pτ are indexed by physical time and have the
prescribed accumulated transport variance ˜σ2(τ) at each τ.
When the physical transport kernel is close to Gaussian,
as expected after decorrelation over ℓc, these anchored
marginals provide a variance-exact approximation to the
physical marginal. Remaining discrepancies lie in unresolved
distributional shape, including higher cumulants when they
exist, and are assessed here using the kurtosis gap (Methods,
Eq. (11)).
The training scheme does not require a known analyti-
cal expression for the forward convolution. It requires only
samples from a well-defined entrance distribution P0 and
the ability to add Gaussian corruptions with the prescribed
variance. For any positive corruption variance, Gaussian
smoothing gives a regular model marginal, and denois-
ing score matching targets the score of this full, generally
non-Gaussian marginal distribution [38, 43].
We verified entrance-only learning across entrance kur-
toses using Student-t families with fixed entrance variance.
As implied by Eq. (4), K(τ) preserves the entrance ordering
and relaxes deterministically along the telegraph-anchored
path (Fig. 2b–d). When the physical kernel is approximately
Gaussian, the model evolution matches the physical one at
the level of the resolved marginal statistics. Residual kernel
non-Gaussianity is quantified by the kurtosis gap (Methods,
Eq. (11)).
The learned score field can also support parameter infer-
ence from detector data through the differentiable likelihood
estimate obtained with the PF-ODE (Eq. (18)). If K0 is not
5


Fig. 3 Physics-anchored diffusion maps experimental timescales to generative processes. a, Initial probability distribution P0 at
experimental source (τ = 0). b, Target detector distribution Pτ⋆at physical readout τ ⋆(e.g., one correlation time). c, Fully decorrelated terminal
state P1 at normalized endpoint (τ = 1). The forward physical process evolves P0 →Pτ⋆in real time. The generative model trains on the full
span P0 →P1 using the physics-anchored schedule ˜g2(τ) = d˜σ2/dτ. The segment beyond the detector is a virtual extension of the experiment.
At inference, integrating the reverse probability-flow ODE from P1 and halting at τ ⋆recovers the detector-time marginal under the anchored
surrogate clock without intermediate training data. In regimes where the transport kernel is near-Gaussian, this coincides with the physical
detector distribution up to higher-cumulant mismatch. This decoupling enables entrance-only training: the network learns shape evolution while
the schedule analytically satisfies scale. Algorithm 1 formalizes the training and readout-time sampling steps shown schematically in (a–c).
known, it can be treated as a parameter of the entrance fam-
ily P0( · ; K0), equivalently by conditioning the score model
on K0 as described in Methods, § 4.5, and estimated by
maximizing Eq. (18) from an observation snapshot.
For the zero-drift VE process in Eq. (1), the reverse-time
SDE is
dxτ = −˜g2(τ)∇x log pτ(xτ) dτ + ˜g(τ)d ¯
Wτ,
dτ < 0.
The corresponding probability-flow ODE is
dxτ = −1
2 ˜g2(τ)∇x log pτ(xτ) dτ,
dτ < 0,
with the score replaced in practice by sθ(xτ, τ). In both
forms, ˜g2(τ) ties the transport map to the prescribed
variance law, while the network supplies the unresolved
distributional structure. The learned score remains useful
in settings such as inhomogeneous transport or nonlinear
detector models, where analytic convolution is unavailable.
2.4 Application to turbulent plasma
transport
We now apply the physics-anchored VE model to the
problem of charged-particle transport in turbulent mag-
netic fields, a scenario relevant for ultra-high-energy cosmic
6


rays, solar energetic particles, and fusion plasmas. Since
these systems are challenging to probe directly, scaled lab-
oratory astrophysics experiments are used to investigate
transport under controlled conditions [8, 11, 41]. The exper-
imental technique, proton radiography (Fig. 4a, c), uses a
proton beam to probe the turbulence, measuring the result-
ing flux pattern Ψ(r) (in contrast, we use Ψ(r) for the
azimuthally averaged profile) at a detector. Here r = (x, y)
are detector-plane coordinates and r = ∥r∥denotes radial
distance.
Turbulent magnetic fields have a typical correlation
length ℓc (the average size of a turbulent cell). We con-
centrate on the high-rigidity limit, in which the particle
gyroradius rg = p/(|q|B) is much larger than the correla-
tion length (rg ≫ℓc). In this limit, the physical picture is
intuitive (Fig. 4b): a high-energy particle traverses a turbu-
lent cell (size ℓc) quickly, giving rise to only a small angular
deflection. The overall transport results from the accu-
mulation of many such small-angle kicks across numerous
independent cells. This scenario motivates the telegraph-
type finite-speed transport framework (§ 2.2). The physical
time required to cross one cell defines tc = ℓc/v, correspond-
ing to the normalized correlation time τc = tc/tobs. The
correlation length ℓc plays the role of the coarse-graining
scale of § 2.1 that determines the time τc needed to cross
the coarse-graining scale. The ballistic-to-diffusive crossover
of § 2.2 therefore applies directly, with the telegraph vari-
ance law (6) governing the transition. By anchoring the VE
schedule to this law, the generative model is aligned with
physical time at the level of the transport variance, without
heuristic schedule tuning.
The nature of magnetic turbulence adds an additional
complication (see Methods, § 4.9 for details). It is often inter-
mittent, meaning the magnetic field exhibits rare, strong
fluctuations rather than smooth variations. This results in
heavy tails in the distribution of magnetic fields P(B⊥),
characterized by positive excess kurtosis K > 0. The particle
transport also inherits these heavy tails due to rare large-
angle scattering events. However, the choice of diagnostic
determines whether these non-Gaussian features are observ-
able (Fig. 4e, f). A reliable experimental diagnostic is the
20% contour of the flux, C20, which measures the broadening
of the beam core while suppressing the influence of the tails
(see [11, Appendix C.2] for details). This observable is Gaus-
sian with K ≈0 because the beam radius is much larger
than the transverse correlation length. The contour effec-
tively averages over many independent turbulent patches.
By the CLT (here applied to spatial averaging across the
beam, distinct from the temporal accumulation in § 2.1), this
spatial averaging Gaussianizes the core statistics. For this
specific observable, the moment-matched Gaussian surro-
gate is optimal within the class of Gaussian approximations
(Methods, § 4.2). In contrast, the azimuthally averaged pro-
file Ψ(r) probes the full displacement PDF, including the
tails, and remains sensitive to the intermittency inherited
from the magnetic field statistics (Methods, § 4.8), as shown
next.
2.5 Modeling intermittency with the
anchored VE surrogate
Section 2.1 introduced the modeling assumption used
throughout the paper: sub-ℓc non-Gaussian structure is
represented through the entrance distribution P0, while
subsequent coarse-grained spreading is approximated by
a Gaussian transport kernel with physics-anchored vari-
ance. We now give this construction a concrete physical
realization.
In the high-rigidity regime of § 2.4, a particle receives a
small angular kick when crossing one turbulent cell. This
kick is proportional to the path-averaged perpendicular
magnetic field B⊥over a distance of order ℓc. For the
scalar surrogate, we use one signed transverse component
and represent P0 by the trained Student-t entrance con-
dition whose kurtosis is closest to the value measured at
the coarse-graining scale. Because the anchored surrogate is
defined only for τ ≥τc, the entrance statistic must be read
at the corresponding path length ℓ= ℓc: we therefore take
K0 as the excess kurtosis of the signed transverse velocity
component of the test-particle ensemble at ℓ= ℓc, giving
K0 = 1.4±0.2 (mean ± standard error over the 20 indepen-
dent runs). This is the particle-level realization of the field
statistic of Methods § 4.8, where the linear kick relation gives
K(∆v⊥(τc)) = K(B⊥). This identification injects the non-
Gaussian shape, including the heavy tails inherited from
intermittent turbulence with K0 >0, at the coarse-graining
scale ℓc, before subsequent multi-cell spreading. The physics-
anchored telegraph schedule then fixes the variance growth
and governs the relaxation toward the diffusive regime at
the level of the second moment.
We validate this construction in Fig. 4e and f. The pur-
ple curve in Fig. 4f shows the sampled kurtosis evolution
predicted by the VE surrogate using the nearest trained
entrance-kurtosis condition. The variance scale in Fig. 4e
is fixed by the telegraph-anchored schedule. Panel f shows
that the entrance statistics, propagated with the anchored
variance law, capture the overall trend of the observed kur-
tosis evolution. In the diffusive regime, the empirical residual
is |Kphys −KM| = 0.20 ± 0.05. The contribution from
residual kernel non-Gaussianity is quantified by Eq. (11)
(Methods, § 4.8).
3 Discussion
We have introduced a framework that links macroscopic
physical transport laws directly to the variance schedule of
a diffusion model. This physics-anchoring aligns the genera-
tive and physical timescales by construction, at the level of
the variance. The variance path is enforced analytically. The
score network is then needed only for the remaining non-
Gaussian structure. Because training and sampling share
the same τ-anchored marginals, the reverse PF-ODE acts
as a physics-timed denoiser: integrating backward from a
detector ensemble at τ ⋆recovers earlier surrogate marginals
and—by stopping early—undoes only late-time noise. Along
7


Fig. 4 Physics-anchored surrogate validation in turbulent plasmas. a) A narrow particle beam probes a magnetized turbulence snapshot,
inducing stochastic transverse acceleration a. b) Evolution of the PDFs of acceleration, velocity v⊥, and displacement x⊥. c) Experimental
diagnostic (proton radiography) (see [11]). d) Reverse PF-ODE sampling visualization. e) RMS transverse-speed magnitude v⊥,rms versus physical
path length ℓ. The simulated variance increases super-diffusively at large ℓbecause deflections then add up correlatedly due to the periodic
continuation of the magnetic field. f) Excess kurtosis of the signed transverse component vx versus ℓ. Panel f contains test-particle and surrogate
results only. Black points in panel e: experiment of [11]. Colored bands/lines: test-particle simulation in the MHD field. The purple curve in panel f
shows the sampled kurtosis evolution of the scalar anchored VE surrogate using the nearest trained single-component entrance-kurtosis condition.
The surrogate captures the laboratory-measured variance scale and the simulated component-kurtosis evolution without schedule tuning. In panel
e the model variance is not plotted separately because it is the imposed anchored variance path. Bands in e and f are bootstrap 68% intervals
resampled over the 20 independent simulation runs.
this reverse evolution the variance path and the kurto-
sis relaxation are preserved (Fig. 2), so reconstruction is
distributional (more detailed than moment inversion only).
The resulting Gaussian surrogate accurately describes
diagnostics that average many independent contributions
(e.g., the laboratory 20% contour via the CLT). For Student-
t entrance distributions matched in variance and kurtosis,
the VE model reproduces the predicted entrance-kurtosis
relaxation (§ 2.5). The kurtosis gap quantifies the contribu-
tion from a non-Gaussian physical transport kernel.
8


This distinction is sharpest when comparing against the
Kac/telegraph propagator. Since the test-particle marginals
show positive excess kurtosis (Fig. 4f), the data favor the
Gaussian-kernel surrogate in this regime. The observed
positive non-Gaussianity can be represented through the
entrance statistics and does not require a bounded-support
transport kernel.
Because our contribution is a scalar path ˜σ2(τ), it can be
used as a drop-in schedule in any VE sampler (e.g., Euler–
Maruyama, predictor-corrector [38], Heun/second-order, or
the EDM framework [25]). Figure 2 already demonstrates
both PF-ODE and reverse-SDE sampling with the same
schedule. In all physics results we train and sample on the
same τ-anchored path to keep the generative clock cali-
brated to physical time at the level of the variance. In
a non-physical Swiss-roll benchmark, the telegraph path
provides a competitive precision–recall balance across the
tested neighborhood sizes (Fig. 5; Methods, § 4.10). A
theoretical explanation remains an open question.
Returning to the scientific setting, the learned score field
provides differentiable likelihood estimates via the PF-ODE
and can, in principle, support gradient-based inference for
physical parameters entering the schedule or conditioning
the score model. This capability extends to complex scenar-
ios (e.g., heteroscedastic transport or nonlinear detectors)
where analytic convolution does not exist, while naturally
maintaining the correct variance scaling (Fig. 4). Note
that joint identifiability of multiple physical parameters
requires either multiple temporal snapshots or additional
constraints.
The variance-anchoring method we propose comple-
ments alternative techniques that learn explicit temporal
variations in transport maps or trajectories, including flow
matching [4, 30], for which [44] provides a unified overview,
and reverse-time simulators [22]. Those approaches typically
use trajectory data or interpolated pairs at multiple interme-
diate times to learn the complete transport map. Our focus
on distributional snapshots allows for a highly data-efficient
paradigm: training requires entrance samples and the pre-
scribed variance law. This makes our method particularly
suited to experimental conditions in which intermediate-
time transport data are unavailable. The trade-off is that
we predict the distribution of particles, not their indi-
vidual paths. The Kac flow baseline in Fig. 2 is itself a
flow-matching model, providing a direct controlled com-
parison: it matches the telegraph variance but predicts
sub-Gaussian intermediate marginals inconsistent with the
observed positive kurtosis (Fig. 4f). The combination of
physically anchored schedules and path-learning networks is
likely to lead to models which are compatible both with the
macroscopic laws and the microscopic correlations. Learned
or non-Brownian 1-D noising processes [10] offer another
route to data-adapted schedules that could be combined
with physics-anchored variance paths.
The application domains listed in the Introduction
(anomalous diffusion, rough volatility, intracellular trans-
port) are natural candidates. For processes with non-
Gaussian kernels (e.g., CTRW propagators in porous
media [7]), the leading fourth-order mismatch is quantified
Fig. 5 Non-physics example. Top: Precision–Recall curves on 2-D
swiss roll comparing telegraph (τc = 0.2) to karras EDM, linear, and
cosine schedules. Points along each curve are colored by neighborhood
size k in the nearest-center k-NN P/R diagnostic defined in Meth-
ods. Larger k evaluates global structure. Shaded bands show ±1σ over
five independent sampling seeds. Telegraph provides a competitive
precision-recall balance across the tested neighborhood sizes. Bottom:
Examples of generated samples at different times. All curves share one
model trained once with σ-conditioning; we vary only the sampling
path (solver, NFE, seeds, and noise bounds are identical), isolating the
effect of the schedule.
by the kurtosis gap (11). The entrance-statistics mechanism
of § 2.5 captures leading non-Gaussian features. Wherever a
system’s variance growth is governed by a known law, that
law can serve as the clock of a generative model. Such a
distributional propagator, calibrated to physical time at the
variance level, could serve as a transport module within a
broader scientific world model. The network is then left to
learn only what the law does not already know.
9


Table 2 Principal notation.
Symbol
Meaning
Units
Defined
Generative model
τ
normalized time ∈[0, 1]
—
§ 1
τ ⋆
Readout (detector) time
—
§ 1
˜σ2(τ)
Acc. post-entrance variance, ˜σ2(1)=1
—
Eq. (2)
˜g(τ)
Noise schedule, ˜g2 =d˜σ2/dτ
—
Eq. (2)
P0
Entrance distribution
—
Eq. (1)
pτ
Marginal at time τ
—
Eq. (3)
sθ
Learned score ≈∇xlog pτ
[x]−1
§ 4.1
K
Excess kurtosis κ4/σ4
—
Eq. (4)
T (τ)
Physical transport kernel
—
§ 4.2
Wτ
Standard Wiener process
—
Eq. (1)
Physical transport
τc
Correlation / crossover time
—
§ 2.1
ℓc
Correlation length
µm
§ 2.1
rg
Gyroradius p/(qB)
µm
§ 2.4
Dv
Velocity-space diffusion coeff.
m2 s−3
§ 4.7
κ
Spatial diffusion coefficient
m2 s−1
§ 4.7
Brms
RMS magnetic field
kG
Table 4
4 Methods
Table 2 collects the principal symbols; each is also defined
at first use.
4.1 The VE framework and Gaussian
convolution
We adopt the standard VE framework [38]. The for-
ward SDE and resulting Gaussian convolution are given in
Eqs. (1) and (3); here we record the training objective. We
set ˜g2(τ) =
d
dτ ˜σ2(τ) so that, by Itˆo isometry, the accumu-
lated noise has variance ˜σ2(τ). Writing xτ = x0+˜σ(τ)ϵ with
ϵ ∼N(0, I), denoising score matching [38, 43] trains a score
network sθ(x, τ) ≈∇x log pτ(x) by minimizing
E
sθ(xτ, τ) −(x0 −xτ)/˜σ2(τ)
2.
(8)
At each fixed τ, the network learns the global score of the
marginal pτ, with adjacent times coupled through shared
parameters. Equation (16) in § 4.5 gives the ˜g2-weighted
form used in practice.
4.2 Optimality within Gaussian surrogates
Among centered, isotropic Gaussian approximations to the
physical transport kernel T (τ), the moment-matched Gaus-
sian uniquely minimizes cross-entropy. When T (τ) has a
density and finite differential entropy, this is equivalently
the unique minimizer of forward KL. After convolution with
P0, the resulting marginal error is controlled by the W2
contraction bound below.
From optimal transport theory [42], convolution by an
independent variable contracts the W2 distance: for any
kernels ν1, ν2,
W2(P0 ∗ν1, P0 ∗ν2) ≤W2(ν1, ν2).
(9)
Let (Y1, Y2) be an optimal W2-coupling of ν1 and ν2,
and let X0 ∼P0 independently. Setting Zi = X0 + Yi pro-
duces marginals P0 ∗νi with ∥Z1 −Z2∥= ∥Y1 −Y2∥(the
shared X0 cancels), so W 2
2 (P0 ∗ν1, P0 ∗ν2) ≤E∥Z1 −Z2∥2 =
W 2
2 (ν1, ν2). Setting ν1 = T (τ) (physical kernel) and ν2 =
N(0, ˜σ2(τ)I) (Gaussian surrogate kernel) yields
W2(P Phys
τ
, pτ) ≤W2
 T (τ), N(0, ˜σ2(τ)I)

,
(10)
so the approximation error is controlled by how far the
physical transport kernel T (τ) deviates from Gaussian.
4.3 Kurtosis evolution and error
quantification
We quantify higher-order statistics using excess kurto-
sis K = κ4/σ4. From the Gaussian convolution structure,
the model’s kurtosis obeys the closed-form evolution given
in Eq. (4) of the main text.
For the physical process P Phys
τ
= P0 ∗T (τ), cumulant
additivity gives κPhys
4
= κ4(P0)+κ4(T ), while the VE surro-
gate has κM
4 = κ4(P0). We define the kernel’s excess kurtosis
as KT (τ) := κ4(T (τ))/˜σ4(τ) (subscript T distinguishes this
from the marginal kurtosis K). The resulting excess-kurtosis
difference is
Kphys(τ) −KM(τ) = KT (τ)

˜σ2(τ)
σ2
0 + ˜σ2(τ)
2
.
(11)
The gap vanishes if the kernel Gaussianizes (KT →0) and
is suppressed early when ˜σ2 ≪σ2
0.
4.4 Kac/telegraph kernel: density,
moments, and parameter selection
The Kac flow baseline is built on the Goldstein–Kac tele-
graph process [14, 19]. A particle moves in one dimension
at constant speed c and reverses direction at the events of
a Poisson process with rate a. The initial velocity is ±c
with equal probability. The resulting displacement kernel at
time t is
pK(x, t) = e−at
2

δ(x −ct) + δ(x + ct)

+ a e−at
2c

I0
  a
c η

+ ct
η I1
  a
c η

1{|x|<ct},
(12)
where η =
√
c2t2 −x2 and I0, I1 are modified Bessel func-
tions of the first kind. The kernel has bounded support |x| ≤
ct.
The kernel moments follow from the velocity autocor-
relation ⟨v(t) v(t + s)⟩= c2e−2as. The fourth moment is
obtained by integrating x4pK(x, t), including the two point
masses in Eq. (12). With the abbreviation u := 2at, the
kernel variance is
σ2
K(t) = c2
2a2
 u −1 + e−u
,
(13)
10


and the kernel excess kurtosis, which plays the role of KT
in Eq. (11), is
KKac
T
(t) = 3 u2 −4u + 6 −(6 + 2u) e−u
(u −1 + e−u)2
−3.
(14)
It equals −2 for t →0, where the kernel is a symmetric two-
point distribution, and relaxes to zero from below as KKac
T
≃
−3/(at) for at ≫1.
The dotted reference curves in Fig. 2b–d show the
marginal excess kurtosis of the Kac model. It follows from
cumulant additivity for P0 ∗pK and combines Eq. (4) with
the gap term of Eq. (11):
KKac(τ) = K0 σ4
0 + KKac
T
(τ) ˜σ4(τ)
(σ2
0 + ˜σ2(τ))2
.
(15)
The parameters (a, c) are not fitted. On the normalized
clock, they are fixed by requiring the Kac process to share
the anchored telegraph variance path. This gives a = 1/(2τc)
and c2 = C−1/(2τc), for which Eq. (13) reduces to Eq. (6)
with u = τ/τc and ˜σ2(1) = 1. The Kac baseline is variance-
matched to the VE-telegraph schedule by construction, and
Table 1 compares the resulting Gaussian and finite-speed
constructions.
The learned Kac-flow baseline follows the conditional-
flow-matching construction of [14]: a bounded velocity net-
work is regressed against the analytical conditional Kac
velocity, and sampling integrates the learned flow ODE
backward from the terminal marginal.
4.5 Diffusion model implementation and
baseline comparisons
We use the VE framework instead of Variance Preserv-
ing (VP/DDPM) models because the transport problems
considered here exhibit growing variance. In scattering pro-
cesses, the spatial variance grows naturally with time (˜σ2(τ)
increases), matching the VE formulation dxτ = ˜g(τ) dWτ,
with ˜g2(τ) = d˜σ2(τ)/dτ. In contrast, VP models constrain
variance to unity (σ2 = 1) via a mean-reverting drift, which
would obscure the direct physical interpretation of the trans-
port coordinates. For finite-speed transport, ˜σ2(τ) follows
the normalized telegraph law (Eq. 6 in the main text). Base-
line schedules use linear ˜σ2(τ) ∝τ (pure diffusion at all τ),
cosine schedules [33], and a Karras/EDM-inspired power-
law variance schedule ˜σ2(τ) ∝τ ρ with ρ = 7 [25]. All models
share the same score network architecture (a 10-block
FiLM-MLP with GroupNorm, using sinusoidal time embed-
dings [38] and FiLM conditioning; approximately 1.16 ×
106 learnable parameters). The physics-anchored variant
fixes ˜σ2(τ) via the physical law; architecture and computa-
tional cost are unchanged—only the scalar schedule ˜g2(τ)
differs.
The score network optionally conditions on entrance
kurtosis K0 through a small MLP that maps log(K0) (nor-
malized to zero mean and unit variance) to a 32-dimensional
embedding, which modulates hidden features via FiLM
Table 3 Training and sampling configuration. All VE
variants share identical architecture and budget; only the schedule
˜g2(τ) differs. The Kac flow baseline uses the same architecture with
a bounded output layer (c·tanh).
Item
Value
Architecture
Score network
10-block FiLM-MLP, GroupNorm
Hidden channels h
256
Time embedding dim
64 (sinusoidal)
Kurtosis embedding dim
32 (MLP + FiLM)
Learnable parameters
≈1.16 × 106
Training
Entrance data
Student-t samples, σ2
0 = 0.08
Entrance kurtoses K0
{0.5, 1.0, 1.5} (excess)
Batch size
32
Optimizer / LR
AdamW / 10−3
Gradient clipping
max-norm 1.0
EMA decay
0.999
Epochs × iters
200 × 200 = 40 000 steps
Sampling
PF-ODE solver
Euler (first-order)
Discrete steps T
500
Requested readout points
40, log-spaced in [3 × 10−3, 1]
Samples per readout
256 × 32 × 32 = 262,144 scalars
Seeds (uncertainty)
10
Compute
Hardware
single NVIDIA A100 (40 GB)
Training wall-clock
≈10 min per model
Sampling (256, 40 readouts)
≈1 min
layers alongside the 64-dimensional sinusoidal time embed-
ding. This enables a single trained model to serve multiple
entrance distributions without retraining.
The complete training and sampling procedure is sum-
marized in Algorithm 1; all hyperparameters and archi-
tecture details are listed in Table 3. Training minimizes
the ˜g2-weighted denoising score-matching loss,
L(θ) = Eτ,x0,ϵ
h
˜g2(τ)
 sθ(xτ, τ)−(x0−xτ)/˜σ2(τ)
2i
, (16)
with xτ = x0 + ˜σ(τ)ϵ and ϵ ∼N(0, I). The ˜g2 prefactor is
standard signal-to-noise weighting [25, 38]; it upweights time
steps where the schedule is steepest, ensuring the network
allocates capacity where the marginal changes fastest.
At inference we draw terminal states from the exact for-
ward marginal p1 implied by the VE process (i.e. x1 =
x0 + ˜σ(1)ϵ with x0 ∼P0) and integrate the PF-ODE back-
ward with an Euler solver (T = 500 steps), halting at
the desired readout τ ⋆. Uncertainty is quantified over 10
independent seeds.
4.6 Likelihood computation and
differentiable inference
The probability-flow ODE corresponding to Eq. (1) is
dx
dτ = −1
2 ˜g2(τ) sθ(x, τ).
(17)
11


Algorithm 1 Physics-anchored VE diffusion: training and
sampling.
Input: Variance path ˜σ2(τ) from physical law, with
˜σ2(1) = 1; entrance samples x0 ∼P0
Define: ˜g2(τ) = d˜σ2/dτ;
˜σ(τ) =
√
˜σ2(τ)
Training
(entrance-only denoising score matching)
1: repeat
2:
Sample x0 ∼P0
3:
Sample τ ∼U(0, 1]
4:
Sample ϵ∼N(0, I)
5:
xτ ←x0 + ˜σ(τ) ϵ
▷Noisy state at physical time τ
6:
L ←˜g2(τ)
 sθ(xτ, τ) −(x0 −xτ)/˜σ2(τ)
2
▷
˜g2-weighted loss
7:
Update θ via AdamW on ∇θL;
update EMA
shadow
8: until converged
Sampling
(physics-timed PF-ODE at readout τ ⋆)
9: Draw x0 ∼P0, ϵ∼N(0, I); set x1 ←x0 + ˜σ(1) ϵ
▷
Terminal state from p1
10: Integrate backward from τ =1 to τ =τ ⋆:
dx
dτ = −1
2 ˜g2(τ) sθ(x, τ)
11: return xτ ⋆∼pτ ⋆
▷Anchored surrogate marginal at
detector time
Key point: only the scalar schedule ˜g2(τ) changes relative to a standard
VE model; the network architecture, optimizer, and sampler are unchanged.
Optionally, the score network conditions on entrance kurtosis K0 via a
FiLM embedding (see text), enabling a single model for multiple entrance
distributions.
The instantaneous change-of-variables formula [38] yields
the PF-ODE model log-likelihood:
log pτ ⋆(xτ ⋆) = log p1(x1)−
Z 1
τ ⋆
1
2 ˜g2(τ) div sθ(xτ, τ) dτ, (18)
where the divergence is estimated using Hutchinson’s trace
estimator [23]. This expression yields the exact marginal log-
likelihood in the limit where sθ matches the true score and
the terminal density p1 is specified; otherwise it provides a
differentiable likelihood estimate. Physical parameters that
enter the schedule (e.g., τc) may be included in ˜σ2(τ; τc),
while entrance parameters such as K0 may parameter-
ize P0( · ; K0) or condition sθ; such parameters can then be
estimated by maximizing Eq. (18).
4.7 Charged-particle transport through
magnetized turbulence
Throughout this paper, τ ∈[0, 1] denotes normalized time.
Physical time t relates to τ via the total observation window
(the normalized correlation time is τc = tc/tobs where tc =
ℓc/v is the cell-crossing time).
The transverse acceleration of a charged particle along
its path through magnetized turbulence B is
a(t) ≡dv⊥
dt
≃q v
m B⊥.
(19)
Since v⊥(t) =
R t
0 a⊥(s) ds, the velocity variance is a double
integral of the acceleration autocorrelation:
σ2
v⊥(t) =
Z t
0
Z t
0
Ca(s−s′) ds ds′ = 2
Z t
0
(t−∆t) Ca(∆t) d∆t.
(20)
For t ≪tc the autocorrelation is nearly constant, Ca ≈
⟨a2⟩, giving σ2
v⊥≈⟨a2⟩t2 (ballistic). For t ≫tc the fac-
tor (t−∆t) ≈t over the correlation width and the integral
saturates, giving σ2
v⊥≈2 Dv t (diffusive), where
Dv =
Z ∞
0
Ca(∆t) d∆t ≈⟨a2⟩ℓc
v .
(21)
Equivalently,
from
a
random-walk
estimate
one
obtains Dv ≃q2B2
rms ℓc v/(2m2). Here, we used the Taylor-
Green–Kubo formula (see [27], and references therein)
and Ca(∆t)
:=

a⊥(t) a⊥(t + ∆t)

is the stationary
autocorrelation of the transverse acceleration a⊥(t).
In physical time t (with correlation time tc = ℓc/v), the
expected crossovers follow:
σ2
v⊥(t) ∝
(
⟨a2⟩t2,
t ≪tc
(ballistic),
Dv t,
t ≫tc
(diffusive).
(22)
The corresponding displacement scaling in the telegraph
(finite-speed) transport picture is:
σ2
x⊥(t) ∝
(
t2,
t ≪tc
(ballistic),
κ t,
t ≫tc
(diffusive),
(23)
Upon normalizing τ = t/tobs, these give the short- and
long-time limits of Eq. (6). Here, κ is the spatial diffusion
coefficient, ⟨a2⟩is absorbed into Dv via the Green–Kubo
integral (Dv ≈⟨a2⟩ℓc/v), and κ = v4/(6Dv) absorbs all
remaining acceleration dependence into a single transport
coefficient.
Note that κ can be inferred in two equivalent ways: (i)
from the long-time slope σ2
x⊥(t) = 2κ t; or (ii) from the
measured Dv via small-angle scattering,
κ = v2
3 ν =
v4
6 Dv
,
(24)
where ν is the pitch-angle scattering rate.
4.8 Kurtosis inheritance and relaxation in
turbulent transport
In the high-rigidity limit (rg ≫ℓc), transport proceeds via
independent scattering events as particles traverse turbulent
12


cells. Each signed transverse-component kick is proportional
to the path-averaged transverse field B⊥:
∆v⊥(τc) ∝B⊥.
(25)
This linear relationship preserves kurtosis: K(∆v⊥(τc)) =
K(B⊥).
After accumulating N = ℓ/ℓc approximately indepen-
dent kicks, cumulant additivity gives κ4(vtotal
⊥
) = N κ4(B⊥),
while variance scales as σ2 = N σ2
kick. Since excess kurtosis
is normalized by variance squared (K = κ4/σ4),
K
 vtotal
⊥

= N κ4(B⊥)
(N σ2
kick)2 = 1
N K(B⊥),
(26)
describing the slow Gaussianization observed as the distri-
bution propagates through the turbulent medium (Fig. 4f).
This 1/N decay holds once transport has entered the decor-
related regime (ℓ≳ℓc). For ℓ≲ℓc (the ballistic/crossover
regime), finite-speed effects can make the true kernel non-
Gaussian; in that regime the VE construction serves as a
variance-correct Gaussian surrogate, with kernel mismatch
quantified by Eq. (11).
It is instructive to compare this physical 1/N law with
the surrogate. Setting σ2
0 = σ2
kick and ˜σ2 = (N−1) σ2
kick in
Eq. (4) gives KM = K0/N 2: the surrogate carries only the
entrance contribution to κ4 and therefore relaxes one power
of N faster than Eq. (26). The kurtosis gap restores the
difference exactly: the kick-accumulation kernel has KT =
K0/(N−1), for which Eq. (11) evaluates to K0(N−1)/N 2,
so that KM plus the gap reproduces the physical K0/N.
This component-wise comparison is evaluated directly in
Fig. 4f.
4.9 MHD-grid turbulence (periodic cube)
We use a pre-computed realization of a three-dimensional
solenoidal magnetic field from the Johns Hopkins Turbu-
lence Databases [2, 16] on a uniform periodic grid of size N 3
(N = 1024). The vector field is then loaded into CRPropa
within a MagneticFieldGrid [3]. The box size is set from
the integral scale quoted for this dataset, ℓint = 0.217 Lbox,
so that Lbox = ℓc/0.217 = 461 µm for ℓc = 100 µm. The field
is rescaled so that the mean field magnitude ⟨|B|⟩equals
the target value (for this realization Brms/⟨|B|⟩= 1.17).
Reference parameters are listed in Table 4.
4.10 Swiss roll ablation and k-NN P/R
analysis
We evaluate schedule choice on a 2-D swiss roll mani-
fold. The score network is trained once with σ-conditioning
(the network learns score functions at many noise levels σ
simultaneously, without committing to a specific time-to-
noise mapping) using σ ∼LogNormal(µ = −1, σ = 1)
and sinusoidal embeddings. At sampling, we vary only the
path σ(τ)—Telegraph, Karras EDM, Linear, or Cosine—
using identical Karras-Heun ODE solvers, NFE, seeds, and
noise bounds [25, 33].
For evaluation, we draw M ground-truth points from
the swiss roll and M generated points (same M for all
schedules). We repeat sampling with five independent seeds
and report mean ±1σ. For each neighborhood size k ∈
{1, . . . , 50}, we compute the nearest-center precision/recall
diagnostic defined below, adapted from [28].
Let rdata(xi) be the distance from data point xi to its k-
th nearest neighbor in the real set, and let dg→d(ˆxj) be the
distance from generated point ˆxj to its nearest real neighbor.
Precision measures what fraction of generated samples lie
within the k-NN bubble of their nearest real neighbor:
Preck = 1
M
M
X
j=1
1

dg→d(ˆxj) ≤rdata
 NNdata(ˆxj)

.
(27)
High precision means generated samples stay close to the
real manifold (no spurious modes). Similarly, let rgen(ˆxj)
be the distance from generated point ˆxj to its k-th near-
est generated neighbor, and dd→g(xi) the distance from real
point xi to its nearest generated neighbor. Recall measures
what fraction of real samples have a generated neighbor
within their k-NN bubble:
Reck = 1
M
M
X
i=1
1

dd→g(xi) ≤rgen
 NNgen(xi)

.
(28)
High recall means the generator covers all regions of the
real distribution (no missing modes). Small k tests strict
local fidelity (sharpness), while large k tests global structure
(coverage). At very local scales (small k), EDM attains high
recall quickly (broad coverage) but at the cost of precision
(lower fidelity), consistent with early aggressive denoising.
Telegraph strikes a better local balance. Across five inde-
pendent sampling seeds, the telegraph path attains higher
recall than cosine at small k at comparable precision and
maintains higher precision than EDM at every neighborhood
size, while cosine retains a modest precision lead at interme-
diate k; telegraph and cosine both approach high precision
and near-unit recall for k≳40. Quantitatively, at k=5, tele-
graph attains recall 0.83 vs. 0.72 for cosine at comparable
precision (0.43 vs. 0.44); at k=20, cosine leads in precision
(0.91 vs. 0.86). The linear schedule has precision < 0.16 for
k≤20.
Data availability
The source data underlying all figures and tables, together
with the pre-computed simulation and ablation outputs gen-
erated in this study, have been deposited in Zenodo [36].
The forced-MHD turbulence field used in this study is avail-
able from the Johns Hopkins Turbulence Database under
DOI https://doi.org/10.7281/T1930RBS. The experimental
comparison data were taken from Ref. [11].
Code availability
The code used to generate the results and figures has
been deposited in Zenodo [36] and is available under the
13


Table 4 Reference parameters for the turbulence benchmark and detector geometry. Experimental values are taken from [11] where
indicated.
Quantity
Symbol
Reference value
Notes / Source
RMS magnetic field
Brms
∼100 kG
Proton radiography & FLASH.
[11]
Outer/driving scale
L
∼400 µm ≈0.35 Lbox
Set by offset grids. [11, Fig. 1c]
Correlation length
ℓc
50–90 µm
Lab inference. [11, App. B]
Spectrum
EB(k)
inherited from dataset
Dissipation scale
ℓmin
a few grid cells
Chosen to match dissipation range.
[11, Fig. 1c]
Domain extent
Ldom
Lbox (periodic)
Pinhole radius
Rpin
∼100 µm
Lab geometry. [11, Fig. 3]
Detector distance
rdet
27 cm
Lab geometry. [11, §2]
Ring statistic
largest closed 20% contour
Defined w.r.t. mean flux inside Rpin.
[11, App. C.2]
Ring →velocity
∆v⊥= (1.65/rdet) ∆rrms v
Smearing model + geometry.
[11, Eqs. C10,C20]
MIT License. Test-particle simulations use the open-source
CRPropa framework [3].
Acknowledgments
We thank Archie F. A. Bott, Robert J. Ewart, and Jonathan
Citrin for valuable comments.
Funding
The work of P.R. was funded through the Walter Benjamin
Fellowship by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,
German Research Foundation)—grant numbers 518672034
and 593157299; P.R. was also supported by a postdoc fellow-
ship of the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD);
The work of G.G. was partially supported by UKRI under
grants no. ST/W000903/1 and EP/Y035038/1.
Author contributions statement
P.R. conceived the method, developed the theoretical frame-
work, wrote all code, performed the simulations and anal-
ysis, and wrote the original manuscript. D.N.H. refined
the theoretical formulation and substantially revised the
manuscript’s narrative, structure, and presentation. G.G.
and S.S. provided scientific guidance and contributed to
the interpretation of the laboratory validation through their
expertise in the experimental data and associated uncer-
tainties. All authors discussed the results and reviewed and
edited the manuscript.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
References
[1] Albergo M, Boffi NM, Vanden-Eijnden E (2025)
Stochastic interpolants: A unifying framework for flows
and diffusions. Journal of Machine Learning Research
26(209):1–80
[2] Aluie
H,
et
al
(2019)
Johns
hopkins
turbulence
databases, forced mhd turbulence. https://doi.org/10.
7281/T1930RBS
[3] Alves Batista R, Becker Tjus J, D¨orner J, et al
(2022) CRPropa 3.2 - an advanced framework for high-
energy particle propagation in extragalactic and galac-
tic spaces. J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys.2022(9):035.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1475-7516/2022/09/035
[4] Baldan G, Liu Q, Guardone A, et al (2025) Physics
vs Distributions: Pareto Optimal Flow Matching with
Physics Constraints. arXiv preprint 2506.08604
[5] Bao F, Li C, Zhu J, et al (2022) Analytic-DPM: an ana-
lytic estimate of the optimal reverse variance in diffu-
sion probabilistic models. In: International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2201.06503
[6] Bastek JH, Sun W, Kochmann DM (2024) Physics-
Informed Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint 2403.14404
[7] Berkowitz B, Scher H, Silliman SE (2000) Anomalous
transport in laboratory-scale, heterogeneous porous
media. Water Resources Research 36(1):149–158. https:
//doi.org/10.1029/1999WR900295
[8] Bott AFA, Graziani C, Tzeferacos P, et al (2017) Pro-
ton imaging of stochastic magnetic fields. Journal of
Plasma Physics 83(6):905830614. https://doi.org/10.
1017/S0022377817000939
14


[9] Brockmann D, Hufnagel L, Geisel T (2006) The scaling
laws of human travel. Nature 439(7075):462–465. https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nature04292
[10] Chemseddine J, Kornhardt G, Duong R, et al (2025)
Adapting Noise to Data: Generative Flows from 1D
Processes. arXiv e-prints https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2510.12636
[11] Chen LE, Bott AFA, Tzeferacos P, et al (2020)
Transport of High-energy Charged Particles through
Spatially
Intermittent
Turbulent
Magnetic
Fields.
ApJ892(2):114.
https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/
ab7a19
[12] De Bortoli V, Thornton J, Heng J, et al (2021) Diffusion
Schr¨odinger bridge with applications to score-based
generative modeling. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pp 17695–17709, 2106.01357
[13] Dockhorn T, Vahdat A, Kreis K (2022) Score-based
generative modeling with critically-damped Langevin
diffusion. In: International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2112.07068
[14] Duong R, Chemseddine J, Friz PK, et al (2025) Telegra-
pher’s Generative Model via Kac Flows. arXiv e-prints
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.20641
[15] Edery Y, Dror I, Scher H, et al (2015) Anomalous
reactive transport in porous media: Experiments and
modeling. Physical Review E 91(5):052130. https://doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevE.91.052130
[16] Eyink G, Vishniac E, Lalescu C, et al (2013) Flux-
freezing
breakdown
in
high-conductivity
magneto-
hydrodynamic turbulence. Nature497(7450):466–469.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12128
[17] Gatheral J, Jaisson T, Rosenbaum M (2018) Volatility
is rough. Quantitative Finance 18(6):933–949. https://
doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2017.1393551
[18] Golding I, Cox EC (2006) Physical nature of bacte-
rial cytoplasm. Physical Review Letters 96(9):098102.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.098102
[19] Goldstein S (1951) On diffusion by discontinuous move-
ments, and on the telegraph equation. The Quar-
terly Journal of Mechanics and Applied Mathematics
4(2):129–156. https://doi.org/10.1093/qjmam/4.2.129
[20] Greif R, Jenko F, Thuerey N (2023) Physics-preserving
ai-accelerated simulations of plasma turbulence. arXiv
preprint 2309.16400
[21] Ho J, Jain AN, Abbeel P (2020) Denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic models. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pp 6840–6851, URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
4c5bcfec8584af0d967f1ab10179ca4b-Abstract.html,
2006.11239
[22] Holzschuh B, Vegetti S, Thuerey N (2023) Solving
inverse physics problems with score matching. In:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp 61888–61922, 2301.10250
[23] Hutchinson MF (1990) A stochastic estimator of the
trace of the influence matrix for laplacian smoothing
splines. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and
Computation 19(2):433–450. https://doi.org/10.1080/
03610919008812866
[24] Karniadakis
GE,
Kevrekidis
IG,
Lu
L,
et
al
(2021)
Physics-informed
machine
learning.
Nature
Reviews
Physics
3(6):422–440.
https://doi.org/10.
1038/s42254-021-00314-5
[25] Karras T, Aittala M, Aila T, et al (2022) Elucidating
the design space of diffusion-based generative mod-
els. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp 26236–26247, 2206.00364
[26] Kingma D, Salimans T, Poole B, et al (2021) Varia-
tional diffusion models. Advances in neural information
processing systems 34:21696–21707
[27] Kubo R (1957) Statistical-Mechanical Theory of Irre-
versible Processes. I. General Theory and Simple Appli-
cations to Magnetic and Conduction Problems. Journal
of the Physical Society of Japan 12(6):570–586. https:
//doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.12.570
[28] Kynk¨a¨anniemi T, Karras T, Laine S, et al (2019)
Improved Precision and Recall Metric for Assessing
Generative Models. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp 3927–3936, https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.1904.06991
[29] Liang N, Oh SP (2026) Beyond the diffusion coeffi-
cient: Propagators and memory in cosmic ray trans-
port. arXiv e-prints https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
2604.11898
[30] Lipman Y, Chen RTQ, Ben-Hamu H, et al (2023)
Flow matching for generative modeling. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=PqvMRDCJT9t,
2210.02747
[31] Martin J, L¨ubke J, Li T, et al (2025) Generation
of Cosmic-Ray Trajectories by a Diffusion Model
Trained on Test Particles in 3D Magnetohydrodynamic
Turbulence. ApJS277(2):48. https://doi.org/10.3847/
1538-4365/adb432
[32] Metzler R, Klafter J (2000) The random walk’s
guide to anomalous diffusion: a fractional dynamics
approach. Phys. Rep.339(1):1–77. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0370-1573(00)00070-3
15


[33] Nichol AQ, Dhariwal P (2021) Improved denoising
diffusion probabilistic models. In: Meila M, Zhang
T (eds) Proceedings of the 38th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, vol 139. PMLR, pp
8162–8171, URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/
nichol21a.html, 2102.09672
[34] Orsingher E, Beghin L (2009) Fractional diffusion
equations and processes with randomly varying time.
The Annals of Probability 37(1):206–249. https://doi.
org/10.1214/08-AOP401
[35] Raissi M, Perdikaris P, Karniadakis GE (2019) Physics-
informed neural networks: A deep learning framework
for solving forward and inverse problems involving non-
linear partial differential equations. Journal of Compu-
tational Physics 378:686–707. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcp.2018.10.045
[36] Reichherzer P (2026) Code and data for: Generative
diffusion surrogates with analytical variance schedule.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21994203, URL https:
//doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21994203
[37] Richardson LF (1926) Atmospheric diffusion shown on
a distance-neighbour graph. Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London Series A 110(756):709–737. https:
//doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1926.0043
[38] Song Y, Sohl-Dickstein J, Kingma DP, et al (2021)
Score-based generative modeling through stochastic
differential equations. In: International Conference on
Learning Representations, URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=PxTIG12RRHS, 2011.13456
[39] Thiel F, Sokolov IM (2014) Scaled Brownian motion
as a mean-field model for continuous-time random
walks. Phys. Rev. E89(1):012115. https://doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevE.89.012115
[40] Thuerey N, Holl P, Mueller M, et al (2021) Physics-
based deep learning. arXiv preprint 2109.05237
[41] Tzeferacos P, Rigby A, Bott AFA, et al (2018) Lab-
oratory evidence of dynamo amplification of magnetic
fields in a turbulent plasma. Nature Communications
9:591. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-02953-2
[42] Villani C (2009) Optimal Transport: Old and New.
Springer, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-71050-9
[43] Vincent P (2011) A connection between score match-
ing and denoising autoencoders. Neural Computa-
tion 23(7):1661–1674. https://doi.org/10.1162/NECO
a 00142
[44] Wald C, Steidl G (2025) Variational and Informa-
tion Flows in Machine Learning and Optimal Trans-
port, Flow Matching: Markov Kernels, Stochastic Pro-
cesses and Transport Plans, Springer Nature Switzer-
land, Cham, pp 185–254. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-92731-7 4
[45] Weiss M, Elsner M, Kartberg F, et al (2004) Anomalous
subdiffusion is a measure for cytoplasmic crowding in
living cells. Biophysical Journal 87(5):3518–3524. https:
//doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.104.044263
16
