Title: 2607.04253v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.04253v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Jul 2026 02:08:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
1

# Diffusion bridge with randomized initial and terminal times and its application to 

# fish migration 

Hidekazu Yoshioka 1, * and  Mohammed Louriki 2 

> 1

Graduate School of Advanced Science and Technology, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and 

Technology, 1 -1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa, Japan  

> 2

Mathematics Department, Faculty of Sciences Semalalia, Cadi Ayyad University, Marrakesh , Morocco 

* Corresponding author: yoshih@jaist.ac.jp, ORCID: 0000 -0002 -5293 -3246 

Abstract 

We mathematically model the dynamics of the number of migratory fish observed at a fixed location along a river in a 

random environment. Particularly,  as a n ew  approach,  we construct a stochastic differential equation that incorporates 

the influence of environmental factors on the fluctuations in the start and end of migration. The model is a diffusion 

bridge with a non -Lipschitz diffusion coefficient, called the Cox вҖ“Inger soll вҖ“Ross bridge, and has random initial and 

terminal times arising from time -change, so that the influences of environmental factors can be efficiently incorporated. 

The well -posedness of the model is first  established , which is considered novel and significant in applied mathematics. 

Second, we estimate the parameters of the model based on the latest multiyear daily data set for the upstream migration 

of  Plecoglossus altivelis altivelis  (Ayu) by relying on  the  hypothesis that water temperature affects the migration of the 

fish, which  has  been suggested in existing studies.  We also explore the application of the proposed model to the 

challenging task of analyzing environmental DNA data.  This study advances the development of a theory of fish 

migration that is simple yet can take environmental factors into account. 

Keywords 

Seasonal fish migration; CIR bridge; Random initial and terminal times; Theoretical and numerical analysis; 

Plecoglossus altivelis altivelis  (Ayu) 

Statements & declarations 

Acknowledgment s: We would like to express his gratitude to the Japan Water Agency, Ibi River, and Nagara River 

General Management Office for providing the fish migration data. We would like to express our sincere gratitude to 

the members of the Hii Rivet Fisheries Cooperat ive for their tremendous cooperation during the field survey. The eDNA 

analysis was outsourced to the Environmental Pollution Research Center Co., Ltd. 

Funding:  This study was supported by  the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST): PRESTO No. JPMJPR24KE. 

Conflict of Interests:  The author s ha ve no relevant financial or nonfinancial interests  to disclose. 

Data Availability:  The data will be made available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. 

Declaration of Generative AI in Scientific Writing:  The author used generative AI to proofread the manuscript. 2

1.  Introduction 

1.1  Background 

1.1.1  Fish migration 

Fish are central to species  diversity in aquatic ecosystems in addition to being one of humanityвҖҷs important 

nutrition sources  [1] . Among fish species, those with a life history involving large -scale migrations, such 

as salmon and trout, are called migratory fish, and their  population  dynamics and life histories have been 

extensively studied  [2,3] . Fish migration shapes food chains and nutrient flows in aquatic ecosystems while 

also  is  directly  affecting  the abundance or scarcity of fishery resources  [4] . Therefore, from multiple 

perspectives, quantifying  the  population dynamics of migratory fish is an important research topic 

There are several ways to quantify the population dynamics of migratory fish, e.g., sampling 

surveys  [5]  and biotelemetry for tracking individual movements  [6] ; among the many existing methods, 

one that is possibly noncontact with fish and is widely used in rivers for various fish species is the fixed -

point observation of migrants. In earlier studies and surveys, observations have been conducted manually 

[7]  using sonar  imaging  [8] , analyzing images from video cameras  [9] , and environmental DNA  [10] . In 

either case, some time series data of the number of migrants  are  obtained, and the main task is its analysis 

and mathematical modeling. 

Previous studies have investigated the influence of environmental factors on the migration of 

various fish species, which are possibly environment - and region -dependent; high river discharge and 

salinity have been identified to control the movements of common snook  [11] ; the catch of  chinook salmon 

increases with proximity to peak river discharge  [12] ; there is a threshold water temperature above which 

the juvenile desert fish migrate  [13] ; the seasonal migration of salmon, trout, and eel around a lake has been 

found to be triggered by the lake water temperature and its time integration  [14,15] ; the calendar date has 

been identified  as  a driver, dominating local environmental factors, of the upstream migration of several 

fish species  [16] ; and  an agent -based model based on trajectories of cold -water migratory fish suggested 

that they migrate while considering the risk of exposure to high water temperatures  [17] ; watershed -specific 

socioecological schemes to support life histories of migratory fish have been proposed by focusing on river 

water temperature  [18]  and  spatial  river discharge profiles  [19] .

As described above, there is an accumulation of knowledge about the dynamics of migration in 

various fish species and environments; however, studies that aim to construct a theory that connects these 

findings are still lacking. One probable reason for this  is that the mathematical methodologies related to 

fish migration have not yet been fully developed. In particular, there  is a lack of established methodologies 

that can describe the relationship between environmental factors and migration dynamics in mathematical 

modeling. 

1.1.2  Diffusion bridge 

Movements and migration patterns of biological organisms, including fish, have been effectively modeled 

by using stochastic differential equations (SDEs), i.e., dynamical systems driven by noise. Particularly, 

Brownian bridges  [20]  have been used for describing animal movements between two spatial points; this 3

method, sometimes called  the  Brownian bridge movement model, has been applied to the movements of 

whales in  the  Atlantic Ocean  [21]  and the great migration of birds between Africa and Europe  [22]  and to 

fish migration , including the estuarine movements of sturgeon  [23] , juvenile movements of harvested fish 

species in  seascapes  [24] , and seasonal lake trout management  [25] .

Diffusion bridges have also been employed in other study areas, such as economics for modeling 

insider information  [26,27] , computational fluid dynamics  [28,29] , biophysics  [30] , statistical inference 

[31,32] , and diffusion models as a prominent topic in machine learning  [33,34] . Thus, diffusion bridges are 

mathematical models that appear in various research fields.  Regarding diffusion bridges, their use in 

biology is not limited to the movement of organisms between two points in space;  Yoshioka  [35]  appl ied  a

diffusion bridge to describing intraday migration of fish, where the initial time and terminal conditions of 

the bridge  are  fixed to 0, so that its solution represents the transition of the number of migrating individuals 

per unit time. The initial and terminal times correspond to start and end times of migration. Typically, as 

for the  abovementioned  model, the terminal time of a diffusion bridge is fixed  a priori ; however, this 

assumption does not necessarily hold true in applications. 

Recently,  Louriki  [36,37]  focused on formulating and mathematically analyzing Brownian 

bridges and derived models whose termina l times follow a specific probability distribution . However, 

another issue to consider, from an application standpoint, is the cause of the randomness in the terminal 

time; for example, this randomness might be a stopping time generated by another stochastic process, which 

can be an environmental factor in t he context of fish migration. At this stage, there are still limited studies 

on mathematical analysis and application of diffusion bridges with randomness in their terminal (and initial) 

time. For fish migration, to the best of the authorsвҖҷ knowledge, ther e are no studies on diffusion bridges 

driven by random environmental factors. 

1.2  Aim and contribution 

The aim of this paper is to  re solve the two  issues  mentioned above: modeling the environmental dependence 

of fish migration and diffusion bridges with random initial and terminal times. The contributions of this 

study to achieving this aim are described below. 

1.2.1  Diffusion bridges with random initial and terminal times 

We consider the CIR bridge proposed in  Yoshioka  [35]  as a foundation of the proposed mathematical model. 

This modal and its variants have been applied to  modeling  unit -time fish count observed at a fixed location 

along a river and is a diffusion bridge that has a unique nonnegative solution. Its limitation, as partly 

reviewed above, is that the initial and terminal times, which correspond to the initiation and term ination of 

migration, respectively, are fixed. In contrast,  its  advantage is the high tractability such that major statistics, 

such as autocorrelation function and time -dependent cumulants, are available in a closed -form solution due 

to the nonlinear but affine -SDE nature  [35] . Moreover, the model appears from an optimality principle with 

a biological background  [38] . More recently,  Yoshioka  [39]  discussed that CIR brides serve as a universal 

model  for describing both intraday and daily fish migration phenomena. 4

We extend the CIR bridge by introducing an internal, biological clock, which is mathematically 

represented as  a nonnegative and increasing process . This time -change approach leads to a novel CIR bridge 

whose initial and terminal times are randomized. Well -posedness, i.e., the existence of a unique pathwise 

solution that is continuous in time and is  nonnegative  almost surely, of the new CIR bridge is established 

under a general assumption about the drift and diffusion coefficients, both being possibly singular at the 

terminal time. 

The qualitative difference between typical diffusion bridges and these CIR bridges is that the 

former are based on conditioning at terminal time based on DoobвҖҷs  h-transform, while the latter use a more 

heuristic argument. The  h-transform is a versatile mathematical tool that applies to a wide variety of SDEs 

[40] , even infinite -dimensional  [41]  and discrete  SDEs  [42] . In contrast, the heuristic approach is possibly 

problem specific, and this very point, as mentioned earlier, is what ensures analytical tractability, making it 

both an advantage and a disadvantage. Bridges arising from an energy minimization principle co nstitute 

another stream of studies, particularly in physics  [43,44] . The concept of randomized initial and terminal 

times  studied in this paper  is considered applicable to a wide range of  other diffusion bridges .

1.2.2  Environmental dependence on fish migration 

We also contribute to applications of the proposed CIR bridge to fish migration as a case study. The target 

fish species is the diadromous fish  Plecoglossus altivelis altivelis  (Ayu) , which  migrates between seas and 

rivers  and  is a major inland fishery resource in a wide area of Japan (e.g.,  Watanage et al.  [45]  and references 

there) . We focus on the upstream migration of juvenile  Ayu  from the sea to a river that occurs every spring. 

We construct the biological clock based on the hypothesis that the river water temperature influences the 

initiation and termination of the upstream migration of Ayu  [46,47] .

In our application study, we deal with the two data sets about the migration of Ayu. The first  data 

set  is the  multiyear  daily automatic fish count at a weir of a river, and the second  data set  is the weekly 

environmental DNA (eDNA) sampling data at  an  observation point of another river.  The  eDNA  approach 

has been applied to  the  quantitative analysis of diverse organisms in environments  [48 ], but the 

accumulation of knowledge regarding its mathematical modeling is  still  limited. With the first data set, we 

conduct computational investigations of this bridge to serve sensitivity analysis. The second data  are 

qualitatively different from the first  data  due to the low temporal resolution and the fact that it does not 

count migrants but under some time -averaged values. The second application serves as an exploratory case 

study to advance our investigation into how SDEs, particularly CIR bridges, can be ap plied to eDNA data. 

While this application example is still germinating, it would provide materials for considering whether and 

how CIR bridges can be applied to eDNA.  Through these contributions, we hope that this research will 

advance both the analysis of new diffusion bridges and the modeling of fish migration. 

1.3  Structure of this paper 

The rest of this paper is structured as follows:  Section 2  reviews previous diffusion bridges and explains 

the proposed extension. This section also presents the well -posedness result of the proposed diffusion bridge. 5

Section 3  applies the model to real -world data and performs sensitivity analysis.  Section 4  summarizes this 

study and discusses prospects.  Appendix  contains  the  proof of  Proposition 1  in  Section 2  and 

supplementary information for  Section 3 .

2.  CIR bridges 

Throughout this paper, we consider a complete filtered probability space ( )

# ( )

> 0

, , ,t t пӮі

пҒ— пҒҶпҒҶ пҒҶ as usual in 

stochastic calculus for continuous -time processes  (e.g., Chapter 5 in Karatzas and Shreve  [49 ]);пҒ— is  a

collection of all events, пҒҶ is  a collection of all measurable events, ( )  

> 0ttпӮі

пҒҶ is an increasing family of 

sigma -algebra, and пҒҶ is a probability function. 

2.1  Existing model without environmental factors 

We assume that the total number of migrants is significantly larger than 1 so that we can approximate the 

population as a real number. We consider  an  ItГҙвҖҷs SDE, which describes the temporal evolution of the unit -

time fish count of upstream -migrating fish at a fixed location placed alongside a river. For a fixed terminal 

time 0T пҖҫ , the CIR bridge proposed in  Yoshioka  [35]  is as follows: d d dt t t t

rX a X t X BT t

пҒіпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,0 t TпҖј пҖј (1)

with the initial condition 0t = . Here, ( )  

> 0ttT

X X пӮЈ пӮЈ 

= is the unit -time fish count, ( )  

> 0ttT

B B пӮЈ пӮЈ 

= is a 1 -D

standard Brownian motion, 0a пҖҫ is the source coefficient that represents the supply of migrants from 

downstream, 0

пҒіпҖҫ is the volatility that represents fluctuations in the fish count, and 0r пҖҫ is the 

reversion coefficient that represents the mean -reversion nature of  the  fish count. The coefficients , , a r 

пҒі

are allowed to depend on time t . As shown later in  Proposition 1 , the SDE  (1) and its generalization 

investigated in this paper admit a unique pathwise solution that is nonnegative and continuous on пҒӣ пҒқ

0, T

and 0TX = almost surely (a.s.). This terminal pinning is due to the unbounded drift coefficient ( )

/r T tвҲ’

when , , a c r  are constant  parameters .

There are at least two drawbacks in the SDE  (1). The first drawback is that the time domain пҒӣ пҒқ

0, T

, which corresponds to the  duration of fish  migration, is fixed, even though the migration duration 

varies each year in real data. The second drawback is that it does not consider any environmental factors 

that affect fish migration. While it would be possible to interpret the influence of environme ntal factors as 

being included in the fluctuations of the final term of the SDE  (1), this approach makes it difficult to model 

for specific locations, environments, and fish species. 

Previous studies  [35,38,39]  applied SDEs of the form  (1) to daily and intraday fish migration 

data and demonstrated that the models with finely tuned coefficients can capture the randomness and 

intermittency observed in the real data of unit -time fish count for both timescales. This SDE has therefore 6

been considered a fundamental model for describing upstream fish migration phenomena, particularly for 

Ayu. 

Remark 1  Originally, the diffusion term of the CIR bridge was formulated as ( )

/ dt tr T t X B

пҒівҲ’ ; however, 

this can be rewritten as in  (1) by properly redefining пҒі ; therefore, they are essentially the same , but  (1)

has a visually simpler form. The old formulation is employed in  Section 3  to maintain consistency between 

the previous and present studies. 

2.2  Proposed model with environmental factors 

2.2.1  Formulation 

We extend the SDE  (1) in the following two ways: first, it is coupled with another stochastic process that 

represents environmental factors; second, we randomize initial and terminal times based on this new 

process. 

We consider that influences of an environmental factor, such as water temperature (called WT in 

the rest of this paper), are assumed to be modeled as a nonnegative process ( ) 

> 0tt

M M пӮі

= that is defined 

globally for 0t пӮі , e.g. ,M represents the WT or its function . We  assume that M is  cadlag, which is 

not necessarily continuous but right -continuous with left limits. We also define the time integral ( ) 

> 0tt

пҒҙ пҒҙ

> пӮі

=

of M :0 d 

> ttu

M u

пҒҙ= пғІ

,0t пӮі , (2)

which is a  continuous and  increasing process . We assume that M is independent from the Brownian 

motion B , which implies that environmental factors affect the  fish  migration  but the reverse i s not true. 

We consider the process ( ) 

> 0tt

пҒҙ пҒҙ

> пӮі

= as a biological clock and assume 0 0

пҒҙ= . Then, for two 

fixed threshold values 1T and 2T such that 1 20 T TпӮЈ пҖј пҖј +пӮҘ  , we set the two stopping times ( )

inf 0i t it T

пҒұпҒҙ= пҖҫ пҖҫ

,1, 2 i = . (3)

We have  a.s. 1 2

пҒұ пҒұпӮЈ . Here, 1

пҒұ and 2

пҒұ are the timings at which the seasonal fish migration starts and 

ends, respectively , e.g., threshold values for WT determine the start and end of seasonal migration. 

With the processes M and пҒҙ , we propose an SDE with randomized initial and terminal 

conditions as follows: 2

d d dtt t t t t t t tt

rX a X M t M X BT

пҒіпҒҙпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,1 2t

пҒұ пҒұпҖј пҖј (4)

subject to 1 0X

> пҒұ

= . The differences between the two SDEs  (1) and  (4) are that the initial and terminal 

times are randomized and the environmental factor tM appears  in the latter. At first glance, the appearance 

of tM is unnatural. However, its role becomes clearer if we employ the following transformation of 

variables: 7t sX Y=

and 0 d 

> ttu

s M u

пҒҙ= = пғІ . (5)

Indeed, we formally have d dts M t= , and hence, the SDE  (4) is rewritten as follows: 2

ЛҶ ЛҶЛҶ ЛҶd d dss s s s s s

rY a Y s Y BT s

пҒіпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,1 2T s TпҖј пҖј (6)

subject to 1

0TY = , where s represents biological time, and we set ЛҶs ta a= ,ЛҶs t

пҒі пҒі= , and ЛҶs tr r= , and ( )

> 0

ЛҶ ЛҶs s

B B пӮі

=

is some 1 -D standard Brownian motion , which exists under certain conditions  (Proof of 

Proposition 1) . Th e transformed SDE  (6) has the same form as the original one  (1). Thus, the nonlinear 

SDE  (4) arises from the original model defined in a biological time in conjunction with a proper time 

change. A mathematical issue that needs to be investigated regarding the proposed model is when such time 

changes are permitted. 

Remark 2  The proposed SDE  (4) reduces to the original model  (1) if M is identically a positive constant. 

Remark 3  A seemingly simpler way to model randomized terminal time is to use the following SDE: d d dt t t t

rX a X t X Bt

пҒіпҒәпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,0 t

пҒәпҖј пҖј , (7)

where 0

пҒәпҖҫ is a random variable. This SDE has a theoretical difficulty in simulating its sample path 

because it uses the value of пҒә , which is random and is therefore  a priori  unknown for observers. However, 

this model has another potential interpretation that пҒә is a genetically  coded quantity that may vary among 

generations. In this case, this пҒә is not directly observable by  humans . Although this deviates from the 

main point of this paper, it might also be possible to interpret this difference as leading to information 

asymmetry. 

2.2.2  Well -posedness 

The existence of a unique pathwise solution to our CIR bridge is studied along with sufficient conditions. 

To proceed, we set the following assumption , which  is not restrictive in applications because it means that 

the biological clock does not stop during migration. 

Assumption  1 The process M is nonnegative and cГ dlГ g. Assume 0tM пҖҫ Lebesgue -a.e. a.s. and that 

M is locally bounded a.s. on ( ) 

> 12

,

пҒұ пҒұ  . Furthermore, assume 0 dtM t

> пӮҘ

= пӮҘ пғІ a.s. .

Under  Assumption  1,t

пҒҙ is strictly increasing; 1 2

пҒұ пҒұпҖј пҖј пӮҘ  a.s. follows from 1 2T TпҖј пҖј пӮҘ  and 0 dtM t

> пӮҘ

= пӮҘ пғІ

. We also set the following assumption about the coefficients in the SDE  (6).

Assumption 2 8

(i)  At all пҒӣ

# ) 

> 12

,s T T пғҺ ,ЛҶsa is bounded and continuous, and it behaves near 2s T= as ( )

# ( )

> 2

ЛҶsa O T s

> пҒЎ

= вҲ’

for some 1

пҒЎпҖҫ вҲ’  .

(ii)  At all пҒӣ

# ) 

> 12

,s T T пғҺ ,ЛҶs

пҒі is bounded and continuous, and it behaves near 2s T= as ( )

# ( )

> 2

ЛҶs O T s

> пҒў

пҒі= вҲ’

for some 12

пҒЎпҒўпҖҫ вҲ’ вҲ’ , where пҒЎ is specified in (i). 

(iii)  At all пҒӣ пҒқ 

> 12

,s T T пғҺ ,ЛҶsr is continuous. 

This  Assumption 2  is weaker than the corresponding ones employed in the previous studies  [35,38,39]  and 

is therefore mathematically more general. 

Now, we state the main mathematical result of this paper. 

Proposition 1 

Under  Assumptions 1 -2,1 2

пҒұ пҒұпҖј holds true a.s., and the SDE  (4) admits a pathwise unique solution in ( ) 

> 12

,

пҒұ пҒұ 

that is a.s. nonnegative and satisfies 1 2 0X X

> пҒұпҒұ

= = .

Remark 4  According to  Proposition 1 , the coefficients ЛҶ ЛҶ,a

пҒі are allowed to  blow up  at  the terminal time 2s T=

if the speed is not fast enough. The blow -up of ЛҶ

пҒі was supposed in  Yoshioka  [35] , while ЛҶa was 

assumed to be bounded.  The application study in  Section 3  implies that this does not the case for Ayu; 

however,  it is uncertain whether the same applies to other fish species. 

2.2.3  Examples of M

We present two examples of the process M as an (aggregated) environmental factor. The first one is the 

random step process (recall that M is allowed to be discontinuous): ( )

# ( )( ) 

> 1122

0 0

ЛҶ1

ЛҶ ,

> t

tM tt

пҒұпҒұ пҒұпҒ·пҒұпғ¬ пӮЈ пҖјпғҜпғҜ= пӮЈ пҖјпғӯпғҜпғҜ пӮіпғ®

(8)

where 1

пҒ·пҖҫ is a constant, ( ) ( ) 

> 1

inf 0 0 inf 0 0t tt t M

пҒұпҒҙ= пҖҫ = = пҖҫ = ,( )2 2 2inf tt T

пҒұпҒұ пҒҙ= пҖҫ = , and ( ) 

> 21

ЛҶ inf tt w w

пҒұпҒұ= пҖҫ пҖҫ

with ( ) 

> 0tt

w w пӮі

= being WT and , 0w w пҖҫ being threshold values. Here, we set 2 1 0T TпҖҫ =

. For example, w follows  a diffusion process. In this case, migration starts when w enters ( )

,w w 

of  the  preferable WT for migration of the target fish species: 1t

пҒұ= . After w first left ( )

,w w  ,

the migration rapidly proceeds toward the end due to 1

пҒ·пҖҫ (2

ЛҶt

пҒұ= ), and it terminates at 2t

пҒұ= . From a 

biological viewpoint, the process M in  (8) is a step function for determining the duration ( ) 

> 12

,

пҒұ пҒұ  of 9

migration, during which environmental conditions, such as WT and water level, are suited to the migration 

of a target fish species.  The case 1

пҒ·= is the simplest because the speeds of physical and biological clocks 

coincide. The limit пҒ·вҶ’ +пӮҘ  corresponds to the situation where the fish migration is immediately 

terminated at time 2

ЛҶ

пҒұ .

The second one is given by пҒ» пҒҪ

max ,0 t tM w w= вҲ’

. (9)

Then, the process пҒҙ is the accumulated WT or its resected version. In this case, the migration starts at 

which the WT exceeds the threshold value w and ends after fish are exposed to sufficient heat. Technically, 

the right -hand side of  (9) can be replaced by a nondecreasing function of tw wвҲ’ . A drawback of using 

(9) is the fact that the physical meaning of a summation or integration of вҖң(water) temperatureвҖқ, which is 

an intensive variable, is unclear. 

2.2.4  Numerical method 

We present a numerical method for computing our CIR bridge in a physical time axis. A difficulty in 

applying a common numerical method, such as the Euler вҖ“Maruyama method, to the SDE  (4) is that the 

coefficients blow  up  at the terminal time and the diffusion coefficient is non -Lipschitz, i.e., tX , and  it 

experiences an extremely slow convergence  (e.g., Hefter and Herzwurm  [5 0]); with these difficulties , one 

may obtain negative numerical solutions or even computational failure. 

Yoshioka  [35]  demonstrated that these drawbacks can be resolved by using the integrated 

variance implicit (iVi) scheme proposed in  Abi Jaber  [5 1]1. This numerical method is unconditionally stable, 

generates nonnegative numerical solutions for any time increment, and has been found to work for the SDE 

(1) and related  models  [5 2,5 3].

Here, we present a numerical scheme for  the SDEs  (4). First, we set a time increment 0tпҒ„ пҖҫ 

of physical time t and time steps kt k t= пҒ„ (1, 2,3,..., k K= ), where K is a  large  natural number. 

Second, we set the recursion for пҒҙ at each kt as follows, where 0

ЛҶ 0

пҒҙ= :1 ЛҶЛҶ ЛҶk k kM t

пҒҙ пҒҙ 

> +

= + пҒ„

,0,1, 2,... k = , (10 )

where we assume that each ЛҶ kM , which is the approximation of ktM , is  already  available. In our 

application, we construct M as a function of an Ornstein вҖ“Uhlenbeck process, which can be easily 

simulated by using a classical Euler вҖ“Maruyama method. We set ( )

ЛҶinf i k ik k T

пҒҙ= пҖҫ

,1, 2 i = . (11 )

Assume that 1 2k kпҖј , which is possible in practice if we choose a sufficiently small tпҒ„ . Then, w e obtain 

the approximations ii k it k t

пҒұ= = пҒ„пҒҶ of i

пҒұ (1, 2 i = ).      

> 1The published version is available at the following link but seems not be accessible to everyone. https://www.risk.net/cutting -
> edge/7961711/simulation -of -heston -made -simple

10 

Second, we approximate X at the restricted grid points kt (1 1 2, 1,..., k k k k= + ) by 

discretizing the SDE  (4) in ( ) 

> 12

,k kt t . We set ( )  

> 1/ 2 1

/ 2 k k kt t t+ += + . The numerical solution at time kt is 

denoted by ЛҶ kX , where 1

ЛҶ 0kX = . We set 1/2 0k kk t ta a M+

= пӮіпҒҶ ,( )  

> 1/2 2

ЛҶ/ 0k kk t t kR r M T

пҒҙ

> +

= вҲ’ пӮіпҒҶ ,1/2 

ЛҶ 0k kk t tM

пҒі пҒі

> +

= пӮіпҒҶ

, and the composite parameters ( ) ( )

1 exp 1 exp 

ЛҶ 0    

> kkkkkkkk

R t R taX tR R R

пҒҰпғҰ пғ¶вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„ вҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„пғ§ пғ·= + пҒ„ вҲ’ пӮіпғ§ пғ·пғЁ пғё

пҒҶпҒҶ пҒҶ

пҒҶпҒҶпҒҶ 

(12 )

and ( )

1 exp 0 

> kkkk

R tR

пҒ№ пҒівҲ’ вҲ’ пҒ„= пӮі

пҒҶ

пҒҶ пҒҶ

. (13 )

We also set random variables ( )

# ( ) 

> 21,1

ЛҶ ,k k k k kU IG 

пҒҰ пҒҰ пҒ№  

> вҲ’+

пҒҶ

and ( )   

> ,1,1

1ЛҶ ЛҶ  

> k k k k kk

Z U

пҒҰпҒ№ 

> ++

= вҲ’ . (14 )

Here, ( )

,IG 

пҒӯ пҒ¬  represents the inverse gamma distribution with the probability density function ( ) 

> ()
> 22
> 23

; , 2

> zz

f z ez 

> пҒ¬пҒӯпҒӯ

пҒ¬пҒӯ пҒ¬ пҒ°

> вҲ’вҲ’

=

,0z пҖҫ . (15 )

We assume that пҒ» пҒҪ   

> ,10,1,2,..., 1

ЛҶk k k K

U + = вҲ’ are independent and identically distributed samples. Finally, we set the 

recursion: 1

ЛҶ ЛҶ ЛҶ ЛҶ      

> kkkkkkk

X X a t R U Z

пҒі 

> +

= + пҒ„ вҲ’ +пҒҶпҒҶпҒҶ 

,1 1 2, 1,..., 1k k k k= + вҲ’ (16 )

if 0ktM пҖҫ and 1

ЛҶ 0kX + = if 0ktM = . The discretization scheme  (16 ) is an adaptation of  Algorithm 1 

in  Abi Jaber  [5 1] to our case. The unconditional nonnegativity of the computed ЛҶ kX is due to the specific 

choices of the right -hand side of  (16 ) as proven in  Theorem 1.3 of  Abi Jaber  [5 1]; although not presented 

here, the coefficients and random numbers there come from a Riccati equation associated with the 

discretized process , which is a reason why the scheme successfully handles the CIR -type SDEs .

Remark 5  Another way to simulate our CIR bridge is to exploit the equivalence between the two SDEs  (4)

and  (6); the SDE  (6) is solved first to approximate Y , and then X on a random, nonuniform grid. We 

do not choose this method because of the requirement of the two different grids. 

3.  Applications 

This section addresses application studies of our CIR bridge to real data sets. 

3.1  Target fish: Ayu 11 

Ayu, our target fish species, has a yearly life cycle that involves migration between the ocean and rivers 

(details are left to the literature,  e.g.,  Tsukamoto and Uchida  [5 4]). In spring, juveniles migrate from the 

ocean to rivers, spend the summer in the middle reaches of rivers, spawn in the lower reaches of rivers in 

autumn, and then die. After hatching, larvae travel downstream to the ocean, where they spend the winter. 

Du e to this life cycle, Ayu does not have any age structure, establishing its position as a model species in 

the study of migratory fish. 

3.2  Nagara River study: fish count 

3.2.1  Site description and data 

The first application site of this study is the Nagara River, a first -class river that flows through the Tokai 

region of Japan and empties into Ise Bay and then the Pacific Ocean ( Figure 1 ). The Nagara River has the 

Nagara River Estuary Barrage located 5.4  (km ) from its mouth  (35В° 4'48 "N, 136В°4 1'51 "E) , and a video 

recording device is installed in a part of its fish ladder. Using this device, the number of juvenile Ayu 

migrating upstream  was  recorded every year from February to June at a 10 -minute resolution. Additionally, 

Oyabu Big Bridge Observation Station (called Oyabu in the sequel : 35В°17'48"N, 136В°40'16"E ), authorized 

by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism , is located  approximately  31.2  (km ) from 

the river mouth, where  hourly  WT is measured. We did not address the relationship between fish migration 

and water level because of the dominance of regular tidal dominance over flood disturbances 2.

In the Nagara River, Ayu is an important inland fishery resource, and traditional fishing methods 

such as cormorant fishing are practiced there, along with a unique culture based on the fish  [5 5]. This river 

has also been a study site for biodiversity loss due to anthropogenic pressures  [5 6], and watershed -scale 

studies such as WT surveys  [5 7] and growth -strategy investigations of Ayu  [58 ] have recently been 

conducted. Thus, the Nagara River is an ideal site for studying the coexistence of humans and the 

environment, as well as the population dynamics of Ayu as part of the ecosystem and as a fishery resource .

Figure 2  shows the obser ved fish count data of Ayu and  daily averaged WT (called daily WT in the sequel) 

(В°C) at Oyabu from 2016 to 2025 .   

> 2See the data at Sot ohama observation station: Last accessed on May 278, 2026.
> https://www1.river.go.jp/cgi -bin/SiteInfo.exe?ID=305091285515150

12 

Figure 1.  Map of the study site in the Nagara River  (modified from Chiri -in Chizu Vector: 

https://github.com/gsi -cyberjapan/gsimaps -vector -experiment ). 

Figure 2.  Daily data of (a) fish count of Ayu at the Nagara River Estuarine Barrage from 2003 to 2025 and 

(b) daily WT ( В°C ) at Oyabu from 2016 to 2025.  Gray circles represent the zero count. Black circles represent 

the start and end dates of the migration of Ayu each year. 13 

3.2.2  Parameter estimation 

We consider the WT at Oyabu to be an environmental factor. This is due to the empirical finding in the 

literature that the WT significant ly  influences the upstream migration of Ayu  [46,47] . Moreover, as 

discussed in  PaГӯz et al.  [14] , the approach based on  a single environmental factor would be better 

transferable to other river environments than those  that  need multiple factors. In addition, as reviewed in 

Weedop et al.  [16] , calendar time has been suggested to be a dominant factor that  shapes  fish migration, 

and hence , adding factors indiscriminately may not be promising. 

We also face another issue, which is  the  data availability of WT, where the record of WT at 

Oyabu is  not always sufficient for the modeling purpose , e.g., more than 15%  of  data points are missing in 

2015 3. Yoshioka  [39]  identified the CIR bridge normalized with two quantities: migration duration and total 

number of migrants with some parametric versions of a and пҒі (Appendix B ). In this model, migration 

duration in each year was given  a priori , and their temperature  dependence was not investigated. 

Considering these data and modeling circumstances, in the first application of this study, we reinterpret the 

model of  Yoshioka  [39]  from the viewpoint of random migration durations, which is possible by using the 

first model  (8) of the process M with 1

пҒ·= as explained below .

We explain the above model with  a normalization  procedure . Assume temporally that the initial 

and terminal times 1 2,

пҒұ пҒұ  and the total number of migrants 21

d 0uS X u

> пҒұпҒұ

= пҖҫпғІ are given, e.g., observed 

values. For simplicity, we write 2 1T

пҒұ пҒұ= вҲ’ . In  Yoshioka  [39] , the SDE  (4), by assuming 1M пӮә , was 

normalized by using the following  nondimensional  variables: ( ) 

> 1

/t t T

пҒұ= вҲ’ and day /t tX X T S= with day 1T =

day, and hence t t Tt 

пҒҙ пҒҙ= = . The normalized SDE reads, in the old form ( Remark 1 ), as follows: day day day 

d d dt tt t t t t t

r rS S SX a X T t X T BT T Tt T T T Tt 

пҒіпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ·вҲ’ вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,0 1tпҖј пҖј , (17 )

where B is a 1 -D standard Brownian motion. Rearranging  (17 ) yields day day 

d d d1 1      

> tttttttt

T T Tr rX a X t X BS t S t

пҒіпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’ вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,0 1tпҖј пҖј . (18 )

Yoshioka  [39]  applied this normalization procedure to daily fish count data each year by assuming that the 

following normalized quantities are common among all the years: 1day t ta S T Ta вҲ’

= ,1day t t S T

пҒі пҒі

> вҲ’

= , and ( )

constant t tr r= =

.

To investigate our CIR bridge along the physical timeline but not in nondimensional coordinates, 

we need to replace S with some available value that serves as a good representative of all the data. We 

specify this S so that the identified model in the physical timeline has the empirical average of the total 

number of migrants on average. More specifically, let emp T be the empirical average of migration durations. 

Then, we set   

> 3Last accessed on May 25 , 2026 .http://www1.river.go.jp/cgi -bin/SrchWquaData.exe?ID=405091285502120&KIND=5&PAGE=0

14 пҒӣ пҒқ  

> emp emp emp 0

d  

> TuTT

X u S= =пғІ пҒҶ

, (19 )

where  the initial time is shifted to 0 and  the left -hand side is the theoretical average of the total number of 

migrants when the migration duration equals emp T . By using the average formula of  (18 ) (Appendix B ), 

we can simplify  (19 ) to emp emp emp 0day emp emp emp 

1 d 

> mnT

AT t t tS ST T T T

пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶вҲ’ =пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё

# пғІ

, (20 )

where the parameters , , 0A m n пҖҫ are available in  Yoshioka  [39] . Then, we can explicitly find S from 

(20 ) because the integral  on  the left -hand side of  (20 ) is a beta function with the degree ( )

1, 1m n+ + .

Table 1  summarizes the nominal parameter values of the model, showing that we have approximately emp S S=

. In the rest of this paper, we assume S to be emp S for the (de)normalization. 

The difference between the maximum and minimum migration durations from 2003 to 2025 is 32 

days (maximum 143 (day) and minimum 111 (day)), and their deviations from the average of 127.8 days 

are 15% and 12%, respectively. Additionally, we have the start an d end dates of the upstream migration of 

the Ayu and daily WT on these dates at Oyabu each year, as summarized in  Table 2 . Some of the end dates 

are the same as those of the end of the observation window (June 30) ; therefore , the estimation of the end 

date may have been biased to be earlier. We found  a low correlation between migration duration and WT 

difference (R 2 value 0.113), and hence , they are not considered in a linear relationship. In contrast,  Table 2 

shows that there is  an approximately  14 (В°C) difference between the daily WTs on the start (9.07 (В°C) on 

average) and end dates (23.23 (В°C) on average) of migration.  Table B1  shows the linear regression results 

of daily WT from February to June at Oyabu along with the corresponding R 2 values each year, 

demonstrating that the linear regression serves well (R 2 values are  approximately  0.9 for all cases). 

The two investigation results above, the WT difference between the start and end dates of 

migration and the linear relationship between the WT and time, suggest that the model  (8) with 9.07 w =

(В°C) and 23.23 w = (В°C) can serve as a baseline. For the deterministic WT case, we choose the linear 

model: ( )

> start emp

ЛҶ :t t

t tw w w w wT

вҲ’= = + вҲ’

,0t пҖҫ , (21 )

where start 20.7 t = (day) is the average of start dates from 2003 to 2025.  The slope of  (21 ) is defined by ( )

> emp

ЛҶ /w w T

пҒ«= вҲ’

. We also investigate its stochastic version where w is an Ornstein вҖ“Uhlenbeck process: ( ) ( ) ( )

ЛҶd d dw wt t t tw a w w t b N= вҲ’ вҲ’ +

,0t пҖҫ (22 )

with 0w determined by substituting 0t = into  the deterministic model  (21 ), where ( ) 0t t

N N пӮі

= is a 1 -

D standard Brownian motion that is independent of those driving CIR bridges, and ( ) 0.1884 w

a = (1/day) 

and ( )

0.8533 w

b = (В°C/day 1/2 ) are parameters identified from the daily WT data ( Appendix B ). The SDE 

(22 ) formally reduces to  (21 ) when ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ  . The SDE  (22 ) is examined in this paper  to investigate 15 

how  noise in  WTs  would affect fish migration dynamics.  With the above preparations in place, it is now 

possible to generate sample paths for CIR bridges corresponding to each value of 1

пҒ·пҖҫ for the biological 

clock .

Table 1.  Parameter values for the nominal case. 

Parameter  Value  Remark A

(-) 1.898E+04 

Taken from 

Yoshioka  [39] V

(-) 1.475E+04 m

(-) 1.137E+01 n

(-) 8.361E+00 p

(-) 1.391E+01 q

(-) 1.032E+01 r

(-) 6.190E+01 emp T

(day)  1.278E+02 emp S

(ind)  8.362E+05 S

(ind)  8.861E+05 

Table 2.  Start and end dates  and fish count  of the upstream migration of Ayu and WT on these dates. 

Migration duration and WT  differences  each year are also presented. 

Year  Date 

(Start) 

Date 

(End) 

Fish 

count 

Duration 

(day) 

WT (В°C) 

(Start) 

WT (В°C) 

(End) 

WT (В°C) 

difference 

2025  2-Mar  28 -Jun  1,318,281  119  10.80  21.76  10.96 

2024  28 -Feb  26 -Jun  1,236,102  120  9.404  20.70  11.30 

2023  22 -Feb  28 -Jun  852,596  127  7.658  25.21  17.55 

2022  22 -Feb  30 -Jun  224,397  129  7.404  28.87  21.47 

2021  13 -Feb  30 -Jun  403,459  138  9.767  24.58  14.81 

2020  13 -Feb  30 -Jun  812,342  139  8.792  22.35  13.56 

2019  4-Mar  28 -Jun  592,439  117  11.48  21.04  9.560 

2018  21 -Feb  28 -Jun  847,565  128  8.650  22.77  14.12 

2017  1-Mar  24 -Jun  1,171,928  116  9.038  24.03  14.99 

2016  17 -Feb  30 -Jun  702,028  135  7.725  20.96  13.2 4

2015  10 -Mar  28 -Jun  957,706  111 

2014  5-Mar  30 -Jun  608,661  118 

2013  4-Mar  30 -Jun  993,089  119 

2012  13 -Feb  29 -Jun  590,157  138 

2011  24 -Feb  30 -Jun  841,043  127 

2010  25 -Feb  30 -Jun  471,415  126 

2009  12 -Feb  30 -Jun  2,174,478  139 

2008  13 -Feb  28 -Jun  2,695,955  137 

2007  16 -Feb  30 -Jun  785,887  135 

2006  20 -Feb  29 -Jun  130,024  130 

2005  26 -Feb  29 -Jun  70,157  124 

2004  8-Feb  29 -Jun  315,018  143 

2003  12 -Feb  16 -Jun  437,693  125 16 

3.2.3  Results and discussion 

We formally set 5emp 2 10 t T вҲ’

пҒ„ = пӮҙ пғ— , which is sufficiently small compared with emp T , as verified in the 

previous study  [39] , while in the actual computation , we normalize the governing equations by emp T and emp S S=

, and after computation , we  denormalized each  quantit y. In this section , time 0 is the beginning of 

February 1. 

Figure 3  shows a set of sample paths of the WT w , biological clock пҒҙ , and unit -time fish 

count X , where we set 2

пҒ·= and assume stochastic WT dynamics  (22 ). The sample path of WT w

gradually  increases  with fluctuations, while that of the unit -time fish count X is intermittent , having 

bursts and rests, which has been found to be a characteristic of  the  upstream migration of  Ayu  [35] . In this 

sample path, migration starts and ends at 26.4 (day) and 148.5 (day), respectively, with  a migration duration 

of 122.1 (day). The path of WT hits the upper boundary ( tw w= ) near the end of migration, after which tM

пҒ·=

is satisfied.  Figure 4  shows the computed histograms of the start date, end date, migration 

duration (except for the point mass at emp T T= with  a weight  of  47%), and total fish count of migration 

for the nominal case with 1,000,000 sample paths. All these histograms are unimodal with visible right tails. 

Note that the start day purely depends on the WT dynamics, while the end date and total fish count  depend 

both on WT and unit -time fish count. 

We perform sensitivity analysis of the  proposed  model, where we investigate the dependence of 

the unit -time fish count on the parameters ( )

> w

a ,( )

> w

b ,emp T , and пҒ· . The parameter values examined 

below have been determined based on a hypothesis that the start and end dates of the upstream migration 

of Ayu  are  within a reasonable range in the sense of average and standard deviation considering  Table 2 .

The total number of sample paths generated is 1,000,000 for each computation, so we can rely on the first 

three digits of the statistics.  Tables B2 -B6  in  Appendix B  summarize statistics about the start and end dates 

and  the  duration of migration corresponding to the computational cases examined below. 

Figure 5  shows histograms of the total fish count for the nominal case, deterministic case ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ 

, less -fluctuating case ( ) ( )

1/ 2 w w

b bвҶ’ , and  more fluctuating case ( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ in the WT 

dynamics. This situation corresponds to doubling or halving the variance in the WT. First, the stochastic 

WT dynamics, i.e., the nominal model, results in approximately 7 (day) and 10 (day) in the start and end 

dates of migration, respectively.  Second, the increase  in ( )

> w

b increases the fluctuation in the migration 

duration but not in the mean, and at the same time , the start date becomes later with  an  approximately 4 

(day) delay in the mean.  Additionally , there is an approximately 5 (day) difference between the deterministic 

case ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ  and the more fluctuating case ( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ ; the latter results in a shorter migration 

duration in the mean. On the other hand, regarding these fluctuation characteristics of WT dynamics, the 

corresponding unit -time fish count is not critically affected by  either the  mean  or  standard deviation, e.g., 

the relative difference in average total fish counts between the deterministic and more fluctuating cases is 

approximately  0.5%. The relative differences among the other cases are also small. This is considered due 17 

to the theoretical assumption about the coefficients ,a

пҒі in the CIR bridge ( Appendix B ) that are almost 

vanishing around  the  start and end dates; indeed, the identified parameter values of , , ,m n p q  are 

significantly larger than 1 , as shown in  Table 1 . In other words, the regions where the average is small  serve 

as buffer zones against distortions in environmental factors, which is WT in our case , as demonstrated in 

Table B5 . This finding is consistent with  a recent report that fish migration is not always controlled by local 

environmental factors but by calendar dates  [16] . Since our model was not constructed to reflect their 

research findings, there is no direct connection between the two. Due to its structure, this model alone 

cannot reveal the specific mechanisms underlying these calendar -dependent biological behaviors; how ever, 

at least in their case studies, simply increasing the number of factors in a model is not always the best 

approach. 

We also compare the models with 1, 2,10, and 100 

пҒ·= . The total fish count seems not to be 

critically affected by the choice of пҒ· , as in the case  of  the WT dynamics discussed above. This is also 

considered due to the robustness of the proposed model, which is due to the condition , , , 1m n p q пҖҫпҖҫ  . This 

means that the same may not hold true for other fish species such that , , ,m n p q  is  closer to  or smaller 

than  1. In summary,  the influence  of пҒ· is negligible for the present case if its value is close to 1.  Although 

it is purely a result of the findings, пҒ· -dependen ce  of  the upstream migration of Ayu  seems to be  small .

Finally,  Figure 6  shows histograms of the total fish count for the nominal emp T value and 

modulated  values  with replacement ( ) 

> emp emp

1 0.1 T TвҶ’ пӮұ and randomized emp T in the CIR bridge. In view 

of  Remark 2 , these situations correspond to hypothesizing some genetic difference among years that 

triggers the difference in the threshold value 2T ; according to the real data, the migration duration may 

vary  approximately 10 пӮұ (day) from the mean, which approximately corresponds to 10 пӮұ % in emp T in 

the present case.  The stock of larvae in the sea  [59 ] may also  affect emp T ; it  would  become  large r as  there 

exists a larger amount of stock . Here, t he randomization of emp T is carried out so that it follows a uniform 

distribution, which is the simplest distribution that we can assume here, with  a mean  of  127.8 (day) and 

standard deviation  of  8.8 (day), which are consistent with  Table 2 . The computational results along with 

Table B4  show that the influences of emp T are  significant for our case because  they  directly  determine  the 

migration duration. The 10% increase and decrease in emp T yields  an  approximately 10% increase and 

decrease in the average of the total fish count , respectively . We found a similar tendency for the standard 

deviation of the total fish count. The randomized emp T case results in larger standard deviations in the end 

dat e and duration of migration. These findings imply that, for the Ayu case, estimation of the migration 

duration emp T plays an important role in modeling upstream fish migration phenomena .

Finally, we examine the cases with accelerating and slowing -down average temperature increases 

over time: ( )

ЛҶ ЛҶ1 0.1 

пҒ«пҒ«вҶ’ пӮұ , which would correspond to hypothetical climate change scenarios ; warming 

scenarios seem to be more likely  [6 0,6 1], but here we consider both warming and cool ing  scenarios . Table 18 

B6  shows that modulating ЛҶ

пҒ« in this range does not critically affect the total fish count but  rather  the 

migration duration. Approximately 5 (day) forward and delay of the start date with  approximately  2-3 (day) 

shortened and extension of the migration duration, respectively, for the cases ЛҶ ЛҶ1.1 

пҒ« пҒ«вҶ’ and ЛҶ ЛҶ0.9 

пҒ« пҒ«вҶ’ ;

however, the total fish count seems not to heavily  depend  on these parameter changes. This finding suggests 

that the schedule of surveys of upstream migration of Ayu, which is conducted annually in many rivers in 

Japan, should be adjusted or its duration adapted to take climate change trends into account. 

If similar data sets about fish counts are available in other regions, then th e proposed  model may 

be applicable there as well; however, as pointed out in  Yoshioka  [38] , the reliability of manual observations, 

especially those conducted only for a limited time each day, is not necessarily high. It should be noted that ,

in the case of the Nagara River, the existence of a fully automated observation system made the above 

modeling possible. We hope that the widespread adoption of such a reliable data collection method will 

deepen  the  understanding of fish migration. 19 

Figure 3.  A set of sample paths of WT w , biological clock пҒҙ , and unit -time fish count X with 

normalization for visualization proposals. 

Figure 4.  Histograms (Hist) of (a) start date (day), (b) end date (day), (c) migration duration (except for the 

47% mass at 127.8), and  (d)  total fish count (ind) for the nominal case. 20 

Figure 5.  Histograms of the total fish count for the nominal case (black), deterministic case ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ 

(red), less -fluctuating case ( ) ( )

1/ 2 w w

b bвҶ’ (green), and more fluctuating case ( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ (blue). 

Figure 6.  Histograms of the total fish count for the nominal case (black), emp emp 1.1 T TвҶ’ (red), emp emp 0.9 T TвҶ’

(blue), and randomized emp T (magenta). 21 

3.3  Hii River study: eDNA 

3.3.1  Site description and data 

The second target of this study is the Hii River, a first -class river that flows through the Sanin region of 

Japan and  finally  empties into the Sea of Japan ( Figure 7 ). The main study site is the Negai Bridge in  the 

Kisuki area (called Kisuki in the sequel : 35В°17'35"N, 132В°53'51"E ) at  approximately 30  (km ) upstream 

from Lake Shinji, which is a part of a brackish lake system downstream of the main branch. 

In the Hii River, unlike in the Nagara River, automated observation of the migration of Ayu has 

not been conducted. Instead, with the help of the Hii River Fisheries Cooperative, the first author has been 

investigating migration dynamics based on weekly eD NA sampling (from April to November in 2025; the 

data quantification was due to the MiFish method  [6 2]) in conjunction with 20 -min WT observations (from 

March 15 to August 21 in 2025; the measurement due to U20, Onset). To avoid a decrease in the accuracy 

of eDNA analysis, we avoided or rescheduled sampling dates when the sampled water was turbid. Ayu in 

the Hii River contributes to the formation of local social culture, as evidenced by events such as net -casting 

competitions organized by the Hii River Fisheries Cooperative. 

Regarding the Hii River, studies have frequently been conducted on the structure and ecology of 

the connected brackish water system in its lower reaches (Ramsar Convention wetland)  [6 3,6 4], as well as 

on  flood  control and environmental disturbances caused by floods  [6 5,6 6]. While there is accumulated data 

on the growth of individual Ayu in the Hii River  [6 7], studies related to their upstream migration dynamics, 

particularly modeling, have not been conducted  thus  far. This paper investigates the applicability of CIR 

bridges to eDNA data to deepen our understanding of Ayu in the Hii River. 

In the sequel, the beginning of February 1, 2025, is set to  the time  0.  Figure 8  shows the observed 

data of the eDNA of Ayu and daily WT at  Kisuki . The daily WT is  expected to increase  on average  from 

February to August in 2025.  In 2025, a  positive eDNA concentration value was first detected on April 17. 

The eDNA concentration has two visible peaks, where the former corresponds to the upstream migration 

of juvenile fish, while the latter  corresponds  to the downstream migration of adult fish. We need to somehow 

separate the two migration events, which is  addressed  based on  the empirical analysis conducted in the 

Nagara  River  case  in which  the upstream migration ends around the daily WT of 23 (В°C).  The  upstream 

migration has  then  been estimated to be terminated on July 14 in 2025 , as shown in  Figure 8 . The positive 

eDNA concentration value after this date is  considered  because the eDNA comes from  the  upstream of 

Kisuki; it becomes positive if there is an Ayu population in a nearby upstream reach from the study site. We 

therefore  focus  on the eDNA data before this date. 22 

Figure 7.  Map of the study site in the Hii River  (modified from Chiri -in Chizu Vector: 

https://github.com/gsi -cyberjapan/gsimaps -vector -experiment ).

Figure 8.  Observed data of the eDNA concentration (copies/ml) of Ayu (black circles) and daily WT (В°C) 

(blue circles) at Kisuki. The  gray  line represents the linear regression of the daily WT data, and the green 

vertical line corresponds to July 14 , around which WT exceeds 23 (В°C). 23 

3.3.2  An extended model 

This  application  example aims to conduct an exploratory analysis of how CIR bridges can be used for 

analyzing environmental DNA data. We cannot directly apply CIR bridges to the eDNA data because it 

models unit -time fish count, while eDNA data are an aggregated index that  quantifies fish populations 

located upstream of the observation point, i.e., fish that have finished their upstream migration through the 

observation point. In other words, eDNA only indirectly counts migrants. Additionally, eDNA degrades in 

natural water  environments as time elapses  [e.g.,  68 ,69 ]. This implies that modeling eDNA  requires  another 

mechanism that describes aggregation and degradation. 

In this paper, we propose the following model  for  eDNA time series at an observation point: ( )

d dHt t tE GX RE t= вҲ’

,1t

пҒұпҖҫ (23 )

subject to 1 0E

> пҒұ

= , where ( ) 

> 0tt

E E пӮі

= is the eDNA concentration  in units  of (copies/ml), 0R пҖҫ is the 

attenuation constant  for modeling the attenuation and degradation ,, 0G H пҖҫ are allometric constants  [e.g., 

70,7 1], and tX is obtained from a CIR bridge. The  differential equation  (23 ) coupled with the CIR bridge 

(4) outputs the eDNA concentration. 

Remark  6 By  Proposition 1 , the pathwise unique existence of the process E holds true, and thus the 

extended  model  here  is well -posed. 

3.3.3  Results and discussion 

We set 2

пҒ·= following the previous application. The daily WT data have been reasonably regressed by 

a linear model, as shown in  Figure 8 , where the model has an intercept of 0 4.885 

пҒ«= (В°C ) and a slope of 1 0.1125 

пҒ«=

(В°C/day) (R 2 value: 0.917). The two parameters пҒЁ and пҒ¬ in the stochastic WT dynamics 

have also been identified as 0.1420 

пҒЁ= (1/day) and 0.7977 

пҒ¬= (В°C/day 1/2 ). 

In this application, for the CIR bridge, we set 10 m n= = considering the first example, from 

which we found 1m nпҖҫ пҖҫпҖҫ  with 6

10 A = (-); this is due to the linearity of  (23 ) where influences of A

can be absorbed into G . This setting is  sufficient  if the objective is to simulate the eDNA concentration 

only where X plays the role of a latent variable. This means that the eDNA concentration behaves as a 

non -Markovian process because the information contained in a trajectory of E is strictly less than that of 

the couple ( )

,X E  .

We assume the same WT threshold values for ,w w  as the Nagara River case , yielding that the 

upstream migration at Kisuki in 2025 was supposed to start on March 10 and end on July 14, and the 

resulting migration duration is emp 127 T = (day). Given , ,A m n  , the values , ,V p q  are determined 

based on the empirical finding that the coefficient of variation of daily fish count is close to a constant value, 

which is  approximately  2 [39] , yielding 2p m= ,2q n= , and 2

4V A= . The value of r is also taken 

from the first application. The remaining parameters , ,G H R  are determined by a least -squares method 24 

between the theoretical average values and empirical values of eDNA concentration, where the former is 

generated by numerically computing  (23 ) with the  linearization  based on the delta method  (Theorem 6.25 

in Henze  [7 2]) with the aforementioned ansatz пҒӣ пҒқ пҒӣ пҒқ

# ( )

> 2

2 t t tX X Xпғ© пғ№= вҲ’пғ« пғ»

пҒҶпҒҶпҒҶ  :( )

# пҒӣ пҒқ

# ( )

# ( )

# пҒӣ пҒқ

# ( )

# пҒӣ пҒқ

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# пҒӣ пҒқ

# ( ) 

> 22

1 1 1 2 12       

> HHHHtttttt

X X H H X X X H H X 

> вҲ’

пғ© пғ№вҶ’ + вҲ’ пӮҙ вҲ’ = + вҲ’пғ« пғ»

пҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶ 

. (24 )

This delta method can be considered a version of mean -field approximations that assume s eDNA to be a 

spatiotemporally mixed quantity. From a first -principles modeling perspective, approaches from local fluid 

dynamics and transport phenomena  may  be employed  [e.g.,  73,7 4], but it is unclear how meaningful these 

approaches are for conceptual models such as the proposed one. 

We examine both linear ( 1H = ) and nonlinear cases ( 1H пӮ№ ) as shown  in  Table  3 with the 

visualizations in  Figure 9 , demonstrating that the nonlinear model  5% better captures the falling  limb of 

the empirical eDNA concentration profile  in view of the RMSE . The nonlinear model suggests 0.75 1H пӮ» пҖј

, which is consistent with the allometric relationship between the population density and 

eDNA concentration of Ayu in a different river  [70]; the eDNA concentration depends sublinearly on the 

fish population. The attenuation coefficient is approximately 0.4  (1/day)  in both cases, suggesting that the 

memory of the fish count remains in the eDNA concentrations for a couple of days. 

We  also  briefly conduct numerical computation with the same computational resolution as the 

first application. For the nonlinear model driven by the stochastic WT dynamics,  Figure 10  shows sample 

paths of the (nondimensionalized) unit -time fish count X and eDNA concentration E , demonstrating 

that the profile of the eDNA concentration is indeed seen as a  smoothed  and scaled one of the unit -time fish 

counts . Figure 11  compares the average (Ave) and standard deviation (Std) between the linear and nonlinear 

models, showing that the nonlinear model predicts  a larger average than the linear ones, which is partly due 

to the model fitting procedure based on  a mean -field ansatz and a  slightly  large variance, while both models 

give comparable standard deviation profiles. Here, what is important is that both models  qualitatively give 

the same results and hence are considered not easy to distinguish from data; we need to accumulate 

knowledge from another standpoint to experimentally  quantify the allometric relationship  [7 5].

In the future,  mathematical  modeling, particularly focusing on the magnitude of the coefficients, 

will be necessary. For example, to investigate whether the result of H is coincidental, we are currently 

conducting continuous data collection at multiple locations along the Hii River. The transferability of the 

models can also be another issue. In this study, we have also applied the model with parameter values ,m n 

identified for the Nagara River; however, we ended up with the attenuation constant R being nearly 100, 

indicating that the attenuation is not working effectively in  this case . This situation is unphysical. Therefore, 

directly transferring a model from one river to another would need care. In contrast, the order estimate of 

parameters such as that utilized in this paper would be helpful for application case studies. Although th e

results obtained in this application example are limited, as discussed above, they are considered to suggest 

the potential application of CIR bridges to eDNA analysis. 25 

Table  3. Fitted parameter values and root -mean square errors (RMSEs). 

Parameter  Linear case  Nonlinear case H

(-) 1 7.476E -01 G

(1/day)  9.533E+01  1.369E+02 R

(1/day)  4.112E -01  3.954E -01 

RMSE  3.174E+1  3.025E+1 

Figure 9.  eDNA concentration (black)  (copies/ml)  For the empirical result (black)  and theoretical  ones  for 

the linear (red) and nonlinear cases (blue). 

Figure 10.  Sample paths of the (nondimensionalized) unit -time fish count X (-) and eDNA concentration E

(copies/ml). 

Figure 11.  Comparison between the average (Ave)  (copies/ml)  and standard deviation (Std)  (copies/ml) of 

the eDNA concentration  between the linear (red) and nonlinear models (blue). 26 

4.  Conclusion 

By focusing on fish migration phenomena, this paper proposed a novel CIR bridge with randomized initial 

and terminal times, which are determined as stopping times of an integration of a  nonnegative and 

increasing process . These stopping times represent the initiation and termination of seasonal fish migration 

observed at a fixed location. The well -posedness of the proposed CIR bridge was established under 

boundedness conditions of the stopping times, which are considered nat ural for applications to fish 

migration. This paper also addressed the application of the CIR bridge to the upstream migration of juvenile 

Ayu in rivers in Japan. We estimated parameter values of the model based on a hypothesis that WT is a 

dominant factor  that influences the migration of the fish. We also conducted computational analysis of the 

model to investigate its performance and parameter sensitivity. We  then  discussed the implications of the 

proposed CIR bridge for eDNA data from Ayu collected in another river environment to gain a deeper 

mathematical understanding of the migration of this fish species. 

For highly fluctuating subjects, such as fish count or environmental DNA data, an SDE -based 

approach is considered effective. This study is a step forward in the mathematical modeling of fish 

migration phenomena, but there still exist limitations to be ove rcome. For example, we only dealt with the 

upstream migration of a single fish species and its downstream migration, and moreover, whole life -history 

modeling remains unresolved. While it may be possible to construct complex models to simulate how 

environm ental factors other than WT affect fish migration, the usefulness of a mathematically simple model 

cannot be denied. We believe it is necessary to advance theory building while maintaining a balance 

between the complexity and usability of the model. Incorp orating genetic information from individual fish 

might improve the model, but collecting such data require s considerable research effort.  Also, i n this pap er ,

although it is purely a result of the findings, the пҒ· -dependent nature of  the  migration  of ayu  was small; 

what about other fish species?  WT -dependence of the fish migration can also be improved by further 

accumulating the  biological data about Ayu, such as otolith and capture data. 

We focused on a specific diffusion bridge, but it will be possible to randomize the initial and 

final times in other models, such as Brownian bridges and other SDE -based  models, using a similar 

framework. Finally, through collaboration between the author, its collaborators, and fisheries cooperatives, 

eDNA analysis and growth surveys of Ayu in the Hii River are currently underway. We will combine these 

data with the  obtained  results  to develop an integrated model for the management of inland fisheries 

resources in the future. 27 

Appendix 

A.  Proofs 

Proof of Proposition 1 

First, we have 1 2

пҒұ пҒұпҖј due to  Assumption 1 . Second, we prove that the SDE  (6) admits a pathwise unique 

solution in ( ) 

> 12

,T T  that is nonnegative and satisfies 1 2 0T TY Y= = a.s. . If this claim is proven, then we can 

conclude this proof because the process пҒҙ is continuous and strictly increasing for 0t пҖҫ , and therefore, 

the transformation of variables ts

пҒҙ= is well defined.  Furthermore,  Assumption 1  leads to  that t

пҒҙ is 

strictly increasing  in ( ) 

> 12

,

пҒұ пҒұ  , and 1 2

пҒұ пҒұпҖј пҖј +пӮҘ  a.s. due to 1 2T TпҖј пҖј +пӮҘ  and 0 dtM t

> пӮҘ

= +пӮҘ пғІ . These 

observations imply that the domain ( ) 

> 12

,

пҒұ пҒұ  is not null and that the process X is nonnegative and 

satisfies the desired conditions 1 2 0X X

> пҒұпҒұ

= = . Moreover, then the SDE  (4) is truly a time change of the 

SDE  (6), and therefore, the desired unique existence result for the former SDE holds true  if we can ensure 

the existence of ( )

> 0

ЛҶ ЛҶs s

B B пӮі

= .

We give an explicit construction of the Brownian motion ЛҶB . We define ЛҶB as ( ) 

> 1
> 0

ЛҶ ds u us

B M B

> пҒҙ
> вҲ’

= пғІ

. (25 )

This construction makes explicit why the strict positivity 0tM пҖҫ a. s. is essential for the time change. 

Under the time change 0 d 

> ttu

s M u

пҒҙ= = пғІ , the diffusion term of SDE  (4) transforms as follows :ЛҶd d dt t t t t t s t s s t tM X B M Y B Y M B

пҒіпҒіпҒі= = пғ—

, (26 )

where ЛҶs t

пҒі пҒі= . For this to match the form ЛҶЛҶ ds s sY B

пҒі , the process ЛҶB must satisfy  the relationship ЛҶd ds t tB M B=

. Th e natural candidate  of ЛҶB is  therefore given by  (26 ). The process ЛҶB is a continuous 

local martingale with 0

ЛҶ 0B = . To confirm it is a standard Brownian motion, we compute its quadratic 

variation. By the ItГҙ isometry,  we have  (ЛҶ s

B represents the quadratic variation of ЛҶB at time s )( ) 

> ( ) ( )

# ( ) 

# ( )   

> 112100

ЛҶ d du us ss

B M u M u ss

> пҒҙпҒҙ

пҒҙ пҒҙ  

> вҲ’вҲ’
> вҲ’

= = = =пғІ пғІ

, (27 )

where the last equality  is due to  the identity ( ) 

# ( ) 

> 1

s s

пҒҙ пҒҙ  

> вҲ’

= , which holds whenever t

пҒҙ is strictly increasing. 

By LГ©vy's  characterization  theorem (e.g.,  Theorem 3.3.16 in Karatzas -Shreve  [49 ]), a continuous local 

martingale starting at 0 with quadratic variation equal to s is a standard Brownian motion. Hence ЛҶB is 

indeed a standard 1 -D Brownian motion.  The identity ( ) 

# ( ) 

> 1

s s

пҒҙ пҒҙ  

> вҲ’

= requires t

пҒҙ to be strictly increasing, 

which holds if and only if 0tM пҖҫ Lebesgue  a.e.  a.s .. This shows that the strict positivity of M imposed 

in  Assumption 1  is necessary not only for the invertibility of the time change in the drift, but also to ensure 

that the transformed diffusion noise ЛҶB is a genuine standard Brownian motion. 28 

Now, we prove the unique existence of nonnegative solutions to the SDE  (6) in ( ) 

> 12

,T T  that is 

a.s. nonnegative and satisfies 1 2 0T TY Y= = . To simplify notations, we can set 1 0T = ,2 1T = without any 

loss of generality; this is simply a linear transformation using the parameter s . The proof here is based on 

Proof of Proposition 1 in Yoshioka  [35] , but we need a more careful estimate at the terminal time 1s = so 

that there is a possible blow -up of the coefficients ЛҶ ЛҶ,a

пҒі . By  Assumption 2 , there exist positive constants ,r r 

such that ЛҶsr r rпӮЈ пӮЈ (0 1sпӮЈ пӮЈ ). Then,  Theorem 6.5. in Mao  [7 6] shows that the SDE  (6) admits a 

unique pathwise solution if its domain is restricted to ( )

0,1 

пҒҘвҲ’ with any constant ( )

0,1 

пҒҘпғҺ , and the 

solution formally satisfies the following variation of constant formula: ( ) ( )  

> 12
> 00

ЛҶ ЛҶ ЛҶЛҶ ЛҶexp d d exp d d1 1           

> ss
> ssssvvsuuuuuuNN

r rY a v u v Y Bv v

пҒіпғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ + вҲ’пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·вҲ’ вҲ’пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё

# пғІ пғІ пғІ пғІ

пҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶпҒҶ 

,пҒӣ пҒқ

0,1 s

пҒҘпғҺ вҲ’ . (28 )

Here, the first term ( ) 

> 1
> s

N is simply a function of time, and the second term ( )

> 2
> s

N is a martingale in пҒӣ пҒқ

0,1 

пҒҘвҲ’

. We therefore have the average пҒӣ пҒқ 

> ( )
> 1
> ss

Y N=пҒ… and variance пҒӣ пҒқ 

> ()

# ( ) 

> 22
> ss

Y Nпғ© пғ№= пғӘ пғәпғ« пғ»

пҒ…пҒ…  in пҒӣ пҒқ

0,1 

пҒҘвҲ’ .

To see that the terminal condition 1 0Y = is satisfied , by the martingale convergence theorem  (Theorem 

27.3 of Jacod and Protter  [7 7], it suffices to show that пҒӣ пҒқ

0sY вҶ’пҒ…

and ( )

# ( ) 

> 22

0sNпғ© пғ№ вҶ’пғӘ пғәпғ« пғ»

пҒ… as 1s пҒҶ . (29 )

Below, we prove the two limits in  (29 ).

For the first limit  (29 ), the boundedness assumption about ЛҶr shows that, for any ( )

0,1 

пҒҘпғҺ

and пҒӣ пҒқ

0,1 s

пҒҘпғҺ вҲ’ ,( ) 

# ( ) ( )

> 10000

ЛҶЛҶ exp d d1

ЛҶ exp d d11

ЛҶ d1

ЛҶ1 1 d .        

> ssvsuussuursusrru

rN a v uvra v uvsa uus a u u

> вҲ’

пғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғёпғҰ пғ¶пӮЈ вҲ’пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғёвҲ’пғҰ пғ¶= пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё= вҲ’ вҲ’

# пғІ пғІпғІ пғІпғІпғІ

(30 )

The integrand in the last line is nonnegative  and is on the order of ( )( )1 r

O u

> пҒЎ вҲ’

вҲ’ near 1u = ; therefore, 

we obtain the first limit in  (29 ) if 1 0r r

пҒЎ+ вҲ’ + пҖҫ , i.e., 1

пҒЎпҖҫ вҲ’  , which holds true by  Assumption 1 ; here, 

we temporally assumed 1r пӮ№ for simplicity, but the case 1r = can be addressed in a similar  way. 

For the second limit  (29 ), again, the boundedness assumption  about ЛҶr shows that, for any ( )

0,1 

пҒҘпғҺ

and пҒӣ пҒқ

0,1 s

пҒҘпғҺ вҲ’ , we have 29 ( )

# ( )

# пҒӣ пҒқпҒӣ пҒқ

# ( ) ( )

# пҒӣ пҒқ  

> 2220202220

ЛҶ2

ЛҶ exp d d12

ЛҶ exp d d1

ЛҶ1 1 d .           

> ssvsuuussuuusrruu

rN Y v uvrY v uvs u Y u

пҒіпҒіпҒі

> вҲ’

пғҰ пғ¶пғ© пғ№ = вҲ’пғ§ пғ·пғӘ пғәпғ« пғ» вҲ’пғЁ пғёпғҰ пғ¶пӮЈ вҲ’пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё= вҲ’ вҲ’

# пғІ пғІпғІ пғІпғІ

пҒ…пҒ… 

пҒ…

пҒ…

(31 )

Substituting  (30 ) into  (31 ) yields ( )

# ( )

# ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )( ) ( ) ( )

# ( )      

> 22222002200

ЛҶ ЛҶ1 1 1 1 d d 

ЛҶ ЛҶ1 1 1 d d .           

> surrrrsuvsurrruv

N s u u a v v u s u a v v u

пҒіпҒі  

> вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’вҲ’

пғ© пғ№ пӮЈ вҲ’ вҲ’ вҲ’ вҲ’пғӘ пғәпғ« пғ»= вҲ’ вҲ’ вҲ’

# пғІ пғІпғІ пғІ

пҒ…

(32 )

The last integrand with respect to s is nonnegative and is on the order of ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )    

> 21221

1 1  

> rrr

O u O u        

> пҒўпҒЎпҒўпҒЎвҲ’+вҲ’+вҲ’++

вҲ’ = вҲ’

(33 )

near 1u = . Therefore, we obtain the second limit in  (29 ) if 2 2 1 2 1 0r r

пҒў пҒЎвҲ’ + + + + пҖҫ , i.e., 2 2 0

пҒў пҒЎ+ + пҖҫ

, which holds true by  Assumption 1 . The proof is completed because we proved  (29 ); here, 

we temporally assumed 1r

пҒЎвҲ’ пӮ№ вҲ’  and 2 2 1 1r

пҒў пҒЎвҲ’ + + пӮ№ вҲ’  for simplicity, but the  other  case s can be 

addressed in a similar way. 

в–Ў

B.  Supporting results and data 

B.1 The baseline model 

This section explains the CIR bridge with a fixed migration duration пҒӣ пҒқ

0, T identified in  Yoshioka  [39] .

This CIR bridge is just the original one  (1), with a formal scaling of the last term satisfy (notations are the 

same as that in  Yoshioka  [39] ): d d dt t t t t t

r rX a X t X BT t T t

пҒіпғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’ +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’ вҲ’пғЁ пғё

,0 t TпҖј пҖј , (34 )

where the coefficient 0r пҖҫ is a constant and ,t ta

пҒі are time -dependent curves :пҒӣ пҒқ пҒӣ пҒқ

dd  

> ttt

ra X Xt T t

= + вҲ’

пҒ…пҒ… 

(35 )

and пҒӣ пҒқ пҒӣ пҒқ пҒӣ пҒқ 

> 2

1 d 2d  

> tttt

T t rX Xr X t T t

пҒівҲ’ пғҰ пғ¶= +пғ§ пғ·вҲ’пғЁ пғё

пҒ…пҒ… 

пҒ…

. (36 )

These equations are in fact the ordinary differential equations to determine the time -dependent average пҒӣ пҒқ

> t

XпҒ…

and variance пҒӣ пҒқ

> t

XпҒҶ . In  Yoshioka  [39] , these statistics  we re assumed to be given as parameterized 

curves as follows: пҒӣ пҒқ

1 

> mnt

t tX A T T

пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё

пҒҶ

(37 )30 

and пҒӣ пҒқ

1 

> pqt

t tX V T T

пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶= вҲ’пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё

пҒҶ

(38 )

with positive parameters , , , , ,A V m n p q  . These parameters have been identified by using a set of least -

squares methods to the average, variance, and autocorrelation of X , as detailed in  Section 3.2 in Yoshioka 

[39] . In the identification procedure, for each year, the time was normalized so that 1T вҶ’ and the unit -

time fish count /X XT SвҶ’ , where S is the total number of annual migrants. With this normalization 

procedure, an empirical sample path of the daily unit -time fish count was considered as a discretized sample 

path of the normalized CIR bridge. 

B.2 Water temperature dynamics 

The parameters ( )

> w

a and ( )

> w

b in the SDE  (22 ) for the WT dynamics at Oyabu were estimated as follows, 

which correspond to the inverse of  the  timescale and noise strength of  the  daily WT. The goal here is to 

estimate the values of these parameters to extend the deterministic model  (21 ) to the SDE  (22 ).

First,  a year  is  fixed from 2016 to 2025. We have daily WTs jw пҒ„ (1, 2,3,..., j J= ) from 

February 1 (day 1) to June 30 ( 151 J = (day) for leap years and 150 J = (day) otherwise) with the time 

increment 1пҒ„ =  (day ). The SDE to be estimated for this year is as follows: ( )( )0 1d d dt t tw w t t L

пҒЁ пҒ« пҒ«пҒ¬= вҲ’ вҲ’ + +

,0t пҖҫ (39 )

with some real initial condition, where year -dependent constants 0 1, , ,

пҒЁ пҒ¬ пҒ« пҒ« with 0

пҒ¬пҖҫ and ( ) 

> 0tt

L L пӮі

=

are  a 1 -D standard Brownian motion. 

We follow the simple estimation method for OU processes based on that in  Yoshioka et al.  [78 ].

With the record jw пҒ„ (1, 2,3,..., j J= ) of WTs in the chosen year, we estimate ( ) 

> 01

,

пҒ« пҒ« as the minimizer 

of the following least -squares error: ( ) ( )

# ( )

# ( )   

> 120111
> Jjjjj

w w w j

пҒЁпҒ« пҒ«  

> вҲ’пҒ„пҒ„+пҒ„=

вҲ’ + вҲ’ + пҒ„ пҒ„пғҘ

. (40 )

Second, having estimated ( ) 

> 01

,

пҒ« пҒ« , we estimate пҒЁ as follows, which is the linear regression between ( ) 

> 1jj

w w пҒ„+ пҒ„ вҲ’

and 0 1 jj w

пҒ« пҒ«

> пҒ„

+ пҒ„ вҲ’  by using a line passing through the origin: ( )

# ( )

# ( )( )

# ( )    

> 1011112011
> JjjjjJjj

w w j wj w

пҒ« пҒ«пҒЁ пҒ« пҒ«  

> вҲ’пҒ„пҒ„+пҒ„=вҲ’пҒ„=

вҲ’ + пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„=+ пҒ„ вҲ’ пҒ„

# пғҘпғҘ

. (41 )

Third, having estimated ( ) 

> 01

, ,

пҒ« пҒ« пҒЁ  , we estimate пҒ¬ as follows considering that the variance of the 

residual ( ) ( )

# ( )   

> 011jjj

w w w j

пҒЁпҒ« пҒ«   

> пҒ„пҒ„+пҒ„

вҲ’ + вҲ’ + пҒ„ пҒ„ should equal 2

пҒ¬ пҒ„  :31 ( ) ( )

# ( )

# ( )   

> 1220111
> Jjjjj

w w w j

пҒ¬пҒЁпҒ« пҒ«  

> вҲ’пҒ„пҒ„+пҒ„=

= вҲ’ + вҲ’ + пҒ„ пҒ„пғҘ

, (42 )

and then we use 0

пҒ¬пҖҫ . Table B1  shows the estimated parameter values ( ) 

> 01

, , ,

пҒ« пҒ« пҒЁ пҒ¬  for each year. 

Finally, we estimate ( )

> w

a and ( )

> w

b in the main text  as the yearly average values of пҒЁ and пҒ¬ ,

respectively, i.e., the last line in  Table B1 . The  yearly average of the interception 1

пҒ« (0.112 ( В°C/day) ) is 

close to th e slope ЛҶ

пҒ« of the deterministic model  (21 ) (0.111 ( В°C/day) ), demonstrating their consistency. 

For visualizations of the regression each year, see  Figure B1 .

B.3 Supplementary analysis results 

First,  Table  B2  compares the average (Ave) and standard deviation (Std) of the start date, end date, 

migration duration, and total fish count for the nominal case, deterministic case ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ  , less 

fluctuating WT case ( ) ( )

1/ 2 w w

b bвҶ’ , and more fluctuating WT case ( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ . Table B3  compares 

the results for different values of пҒ· . Table B4  compares the results for different values of emp T .

Second, we conduct sensitivity analysis against the parameters ,m n  that determine the average 

curve  (37 ). To maintain the theoretical consistency between the nominal and modified models, based on 

the relationship  (20 ) about the total fish count, the new parameter values of ,m n  , which  are  denoted here 

by ,m n пӮў пӮў , are  determined so that the following equality is satisfied: emp emp       

> 00emp emp emp emp emp emp

1 d 1 d    

> mnmnTT

t t t t t tA AT T T T T T 

> пӮўпӮў

пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶пӮўвҲ’ = вҲ’пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғ·пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё

# пғІ пғІ

, (43 )

where AпӮў is the coefficient A for the modified model and is uniquely determined from  (43 ) once ( )

,m n пӮў пӮў

is given. We examine the two cases ( ) ( )

, 1,1 m n пӮў пӮў =  and ( )

0.5,0.5  . Here, smaller values of ,m n пӮў пӮў

imply  shorter durations during which the unit -time fish count is close to 0. Under the computational 

conditions  in  Section 3.1 , for the nominal case and more fluctuating case ( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ , as reported in 

Table B5 , the  sensitivity of Ave and Std against the WT dynamics is clearly higher than that of the nominal 

case. We also investigate the influences of пҒ· , confirming  the  higher sensitivity of the unit -time fish count 

against the biological clock, although not presented here. Finally,  Table B6  compares the results for 

different values of 1

пҒ« .32 

Table B1.  Estimated parameter values of the quadruple ( ) 

> 01

, , ,

пҒ« пҒ« пҒЁ пҒ¬  . Yearly average values are also 

presented. R 2 values for the linear regression 0 1t

пҒ« пҒ«+ are  also presented 

Year 0

пҒ« (В°C) 1

пҒ« (В°C/day) пҒЁ (1/day) пҒ¬ (В°C/day 1/2 ) R2

2025  6.196.E+00  1.121.E -01  2.440.E -01  9.179.E -01  0.923 

2024  6.988.E+00  1.106.E -01  1.276.E -01  8.801.E -01  0.879 

2023  7.675.E+00  9.992.E -02  2.222.E -01  8.812.E -01  0.901 

2022  6.072.E+00  1.261.E -01  1.721.E -01  9.004.E -01  0.927 

2021  7.532.E+00  1.017.E -01  2.422.E -01  9.051.E -01  0.913 

2020  7.600.E+00  1.071.E -01  1.230.E -01  7.644.E -01  0.895 

2019  7.396.E+00  1.077.E -01  1.645.E -01  7.865.E -01  0.923 

2018  5.882.E+00  1.195.E -01  2.036.E -01  9.122.E -01  0.930 

2017  5.497.E+00  1.262.E -01  1.917.E -01  7.709.E -01  0.946 

2016  6.607.E+00  1.135.E -01  1.937.E -01  8.145.E -01  0.932 

Average  6.744.E+00  1.124.E -01  1.884.E -01  8.533.E -01 

Table B2.  Average (Ave) and standard deviation (Std) of the start date, end date, migration duration, and 

total fish count for the nominal case, case ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ  , case ( ) ( )

1/ 2 w w

b bвҶ’ , and case ( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ .

Nominal ( )

> w

a вҶ’ +пӮҘ ( ) ( )

1/ 2 w w

b bвҶ’( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’

Ave of start date (day)  1.346.E+01  2.070.E+01  1.756.E+01  9.695.E+00 

Std of start date (day)  7.725.E+00  0 6.945.E+00  7.536.E+00 

Ave of end date (day)  1.384.E+02  1.485.E+02  1.434.E+02  1.327.E+02 

Std of end date (day)  6.321.E+00  0 5.745.E+00  6.764.E+00 

Ave of migration duration (day)  1.250.E+02  1.278.E+02  1.258.E+02  1.230.E+02 

Std of migration duration (day)  3.969.E+00  0 2.918.E+00  5.624.E+00 

Ave of total fish count (ind)  8.369.E+05  8.381.E+05  8.374.E+05  8.342.E+05 

Std of total fish count (ind)  2.037.E+05  2.038.E+05  2.037.E+05  2.044.E+05 

Table B3.  Similar to  Table B2  but for different values of пҒ· .1

пҒ·=2

пҒ·=

(Nominal) 10 

пҒ·=100 

пҒ·=

Ave of start date (day)  1.345.E+01  1.346.E+01  1.346.E+01  1.345.E+01 

Std of start date (day)  7.715.E+00  7.725.E+00  7.720.E+00  7.718.E+00 

Ave of end date (day)  1.413.E+02  1.384.E+02  1.362.E+02  1.357.E+02 

Std of end date (day)  7.715.E+00  6.321.E+00  6.849.E+00  7.159.E+00 

Ave of migration duration (day)  1.278.E+02  1.250.E+02  1.227.E+02  1.222.E+02 

Std of migration duration (day)  2.060.E -09  3.969.E+00  7.135.E+00  7.861.E+00 

Ave of total fish count (ind)  8.377.E+05  8.369.E+05  8.364.E+05  8.364.E+05 

Std of total fish count (ind)  2.037.E+05  2.037.E+05  2.038.E+05  2.042.E+05 

Table B4.  Similar to  Table B2  but for the nomina case, the cases ( ) 

> emp emp

1 0.1 T TвҶ’ пӮұ , and randomized emp T

.

Nominal emp emp 1.1 T TвҶ’emp emp 0.9 T TвҶ’ Random emp T

Ave of start date (day)  1.346.E+01  1.347.E+01  1.346.E+01  1.347.E+01 

Std of start date (day)  7.725.E+00  7.724.E+00  7.726.E+00  7.723.E+00 

Ave of end date (day)  1.384.E+02  1.466.E+02  1.278.E+02  1.379.E+02 

Std of end date (day)  6.321.E+00  6.064.E+00  7.141.E+00  9.166.E+00 

Ave of migration duration (day)  1.250.E+02  1.332.E+02  1.144.E+02  1.244.E+02 

Std of migration duration (day)  3.969.E+00  5.628.E+00  1.888.E+00  7.676.E+00 

Ave of total fish count (ind)  8.369.E+05  9.177.E+05  7.538.E+05  8.361.E+05 

Std of total fish count (ind)  2.037.E+05  2.242.E+05  1.834.E+05  2.120.E+05 33 

Table B5.  Similar to  Table B2  but  for different values of ( )

,m n  .1m n= =1m n= =

(( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ )0.5 m n= =0.5 m n= = (( ) ( )

2w w

b bвҶ’ )

Ave of start date (day)  1.346.E+01  9.695.E+00  1.346.E+01  9.695.E+00 

Std of start date (day)  7.725.E+00  7.536.E+00  7.725.E+00  7.536.E+00 

Ave of end date (day)  1.384.E+02  1.327.E+02  1.384.E+02  1.327.E+02 

Std of end date (day)  6.321.E+00  6.764.E+00  6.321.E+00  6.764.E+00 

Ave of migration duration (day)  1.250.E+02  1.230.E+02  1.250.E+02  1.230.E+02 

Std of migration duration (day)  3.969.E+00  5.624.E+00  3.969.E+00  5.624.E+00 

Ave of total fish count (ind)  8.295.E+05  8.219.E+05  8.255.E+05  8.157.E+05 

Std of total fish count (ind)  2.037.E+05  2.046.E+05  2.041.E+05  2.052.E+05 

Table B6.  Similar to  Table B2  but for the nominal case and cases ( )

ЛҶ ЛҶ1 0.1 

пҒ«пҒ«вҶ’ пӮұ .

Nominal ЛҶ ЛҶ1.1 

пҒ« пҒ«вҶ’ЛҶ ЛҶ0.9 

пҒ« пҒ«вҶ’

Ave of start date (day)  1.346.E+01  1.297.E+01  1.400.E+01 

Std of start date (day)  7.725.E+00  7.315.E+00  8.178.E+00 

Ave of end date (day)  1.384.E+02  1.341.E+02  1.411.E+02 

Std of end date (day)  6.321.E+00  5.666.E+00  7.560.E+00 

Ave of migration duration (day)  1.250.E+02  1.212.E+02  1.271.E+02 

Std of migration duration (day)  3.969.E+00  5.194.E+00  2.058.E+00 

Ave of total fish count (ind)  8.369.E+05  8.344.E+05  8.375.E+05 

Std of total fish count (ind)  2.037.E+05  2.040.E+05  2.038.E+05 34 

Figure B1.  Visualizations of the linear regression of daily WT (В°C) each day t from February 1 (day 1) 

to June 30 (day 150 or 151): empirical values (black) and regression results (blue). 35 

Reference 

[1]  Bernhardt, J. R., & OвҖҷConnor, M. I. (2021). Aquatic biodiversity enhances multiple nutritional benefits to humans. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(15), e1917487118. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1917487118 

[2]  Lucas, M. C., Baras, E., Thom, T. J., Duncan, A., & SlavГӯk, O. (2001). Migration of freshwater fishes, Blackwell 

Science, Oxford. 

[3]  Cooke, S. J., Bergman, J. N., Twardek, W. M., Piczak, M. L., Casselberry, G. A., Lutek, K., ... & Lennox, R. J. 

(2022). The movement ecology of fishes. Journal of Fish Biology, 101(4), 756 -779. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jfb.15153 

[4]  Kurasawa, A., Onishi, Y., Koba, K., Fukushima, K., & Uno, H. (2024). Sequential migrations of diverse fish 

community provide seasonally prolonged and stable nutrient inputs to a river. Science advances, 10(43), 

eadq0945.  https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adq0945 

[5]  Towne, K., Olinger, C. T., & Wright, G. (2026). Comparison of the electrified dozer trawl and boat electrofishing 

for fish community sampling in turbid and clear river systems. North American Journal of Fisheries Management, 

vqag029.  https://doi.org/10.1093/najfmt/vqag029 

[6]  Fujihara, M., Watanabe, K., Yoshioka, H., Ichion, E., Chono, S., & Izumi, T. (2026). Computational model for 

upstream migration of Ayu ( Plecoglossus altivelis ) in an agricultural canal equipped with hydraulic drops and 

tilting weirs. Paddy and Water Environment, 24(1), 1 -11.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10333 -025 -01046 -3

[7]  RamГӯrez -ГҒlvarez, R., Contreras, S., Vivancos, A., Reid, M., LГіpez -RodrГӯguez, R., & GГіrski, K. (2022). 

Unpacking the complexity of longitudinal movement and recruitment patterns of facultative amphidromous fish. 

Scientific Reports, 12(1), 3164.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -022 -06936 -8

[8]  Quade, A. H., Ferrara, A., Fontenot, Q., Boyle, K. S., David, S. R., & Rieucau, G. (2025). Spotting gar using 

imaging sonar: The effects of river вҖ“floodplain habitat connectivity on a lepisosteid assemblage. Transactions of 

the American Fisheries Society, 1 54(2), 115 -126.  https://doi.org/10.1093/tafafs/vnae006 

[9]  Abe, K., Kitanishi, R., Habe, H., Otani, M., & Iguchi, N. (2025). A Fish Counting System with Video Camera 

for Hatchery -produced Juvenile Fish. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, 2024EDP7282. 

https://doi.org/10.1587/transinf.2024EDP7282 

[10]  Rourke, M. L., Fowler, A. M., Hughes, J. M., Broadhurst, M. K., DiBattista, J. D., Fielder, S., ... & Furlan, E. M. 

(2022). Environmental DNA (eDNA) as a tool for assessing fish biomass: A review of approaches and future 

considerations for resource surveys . Environmental DNA, 4(1), 9 -33.  https://doi.org/10.1002/edn3.185 

[11]  Kleiman, L. E., Young, J. M., Rhoades, O. K., Ajemian, M. J., & Baldwin, J. D. (2026). The role of freshwater 

discharges on Common Snook movements and distribution in a south Florida estuary. Marine and Coastal 

Fisheries, 18(2), vtag002.  https://doi.org/10.1093/mcfafs/vtag002 

[12]  Rigby, C. R., & Gaeta, J. W. (2026). Evaluating Patterns of Juvenile Chinook Salmon OutвҖҗMigration During 

Pulse Flow Events in California's Sacramento River to Inform Operations of a Newly Proposed Water 

Infrastructure Project. River Research and Applicatio ns. Online published. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/rra.70155Digital 

[13]  Al -Chokhachy, R., Peka, R., Horgen, E., Kaus, D. J., Loux, T., & Heki, L. (2022). Water availability drives 

instream conditions and life -history of an imperiled desert fish: a case study to inform water management. Science 

of The Total Environment, 832, 15 4614.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154614 

[14]  PaГӯz, R., Thomas, R. Q., Carey, C. C., de Eyto, E., Jones, I. D., Delany, A. D., ... & Jennings, E. (2025). NearвҖҗ 

term lake water temperature forecasts can be used to anticipate the ecological dynamics of freshwater species. 

Ecosphere, 16(7), e70335.  https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.70335 

[15]  Potapova, A., Moore, J. W., Parken, C. K., Sloat, M., Atlas, W., & Jones, L. A. (2026). RangeвҖҗwide life history 

diversity and climate exposure in adult Chinook salmon. Ecosphere, 17(3), e70572. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.70572 

[16]  Weedop, D., Romer, J. D., Ziller, J. S., & Murphy, C. A. (2026). Timing is everything: Drivers of upstream 

movement of fishes. Transactions of the American Fisheries Society, vnag008. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/tafafs/vnag008 

[17]  Keefer, M. L., & Caudill, C. C. (2026). Migration phenology of adult Chinook salmon: tradeoffs among acute 

and cumulative thermal exposure risks. Journal of Thermal Biology, 104388. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtherbio.2026.104388 

[18]  Moore, J. W., Ulaski, M. E., Wilson, K. L., Martin, T. G., Kuiper, S. D., Peacock, S. J., ... & Zdasiuk, B. J. (2025). 

A safe operating space for Salmon watersheds under rapid climate change. Fish and Fisheries, 26(6), 1213 -1228. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.70027 

[19]  Kouba, C., Scantlebury, L., Wiener, J., Yarnell, S., & Harter, T. (2025). A WatershedвҖҗSpecific Approach to 

Identify Key Functional Flow Metrics Supporting Salmon Reproduction. Ecohydrology, 18(5), e70098. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/eco.70098 

[20]  Vervaat, W. (1979). A relation between Brownian bridge and Brownian excursion. The Annals of Probability, 

143 -149.  https://doi.org/10.1214/aop/1176995155 

[21]  Kreuser, A. M., Pendleton, D. E., Record, N. R., & MeyerвҖҗGutbrod, E. L. (2026). Individual movement modeling 

expands the power of migratory species observations: North Atlantic right whale case study. Limnology and 

Oceanography: Methods, e70049.  https://doi.org/10.1002/lom3.70049 36 

[22]  Jorzik, I., Fiedler, W., Kaatz, M., Rotics, S., Nathan, R., Wikelski, M., & Flack, A. (2026). Timing shapes flyway 

selection in juvenile white storks at the European migratory divide. Journal of Ornithology, 167(1), 131 -142. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10336 -025 -02322 -z

[23]  Acolas, M. L., Le Pichon, C., & Rochard, E. (2017). Spring habitat use  by stocked one year old European sturgeon 

Acipenser sturio in the freshwater -oligohaline area of the Gironde estuary. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 

196, 58 -69.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2017.06.029 

[24]  Swadling, D. S., Knott, N. A., Taylor, M. D., Rees, M. J., Cadiou, G., & Davis, A. R. (2024). Consequences of 

juvenile fish movement and seascape connectivity: does the concept of nursery habitat need a rethink?.  Estuaries 

and Coasts, 47(3), 607 -621.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s12237 -023 -01323 -6

[25]  Futia, M. H., Binder, T. R., Henderson, M., & Marsden, J. E. (2024).  Modeling regional occupancy of fishes 

using acoustic telemetry: A model comparison framework applied to lake trout. Animal Biotelemetry, 12(1), 25. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40317 -024 -00380 -3

[26]  Abi Jaber, E., & Villeneuve, S. (2025).  Gaussian agency problems with memory and linear contracts. Finance 

and Stochastics, 29(1), 143 -176.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00780 -024 -00548 -y

[27]  Singham, D. I., & Rodgers, M. (2022). A shortage probability metric for battery depletion risk. Operations 

Research Letters, 50(6), 660 -666.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orl.2022.10.005 

[28]  Bischoff, T., & Deck, K. (2024). Unpaired downscaling of fluid flows with diffusion bridges. Artificial 

Intelligence for the Earth Systems, 3(2), e230039.  https://doi.org/10.1175/AIES -D-23 -0039.1 

[29]  Qian, Z., SГјli, E., & Zhang, Y. (2022).  Random vortex dynamics via functional stochastic differential equations. 

Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 478(2266). 

https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2022.0030 

[30]  Lenner, N., HГӨring, M., Eule, S., GroГҹhans, J., & Wolf, F. (2026).  Landscape of Target State Directed Processes 

in Living Systems. PRX Life, 4(1), 013024.  https://doi.org/10.1103/cx3h -q6d2 

[31]  Amankwah, M., Bersani, A., Calvetti, D., Davico, G., Somersalo, E., & Viceconti, M. (2024). Exploring muscle 

recruitment by Bayesian methods during motion. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 185, 115082. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2024.115082 

[32]  Alazemi, F., Alsenafi, A., Chen, Y., & Zhou, H. (2024).  Parameter estimation for the complex fractional Ornstein вҖ“

Uhlenbeck processes with Hurst parameter HвҲҲ(0, 12). Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 188, 115556. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2024.115556 

[33]  Behjoo, H., & Chertkov, M. M. (2024). Space -Time Diffusion Bridge. IFAC -PapersOnLine, 58(17), 274 -279. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2024.10.181 

[34]  Nobis, G., Springenberg, M., Belova, A., Daems, R., Knochenhauer, C., Opper, M., ...  & Samek, W. (2026). 

Fractional diffusion  bridge models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 38, 114521 -114571. 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/file/a66caa1703fe34705a4368c3014c1966 -Paper -

Conference.pdf 

[35]  Yoshioka, H. (2025). CIR bridge for modeling of fish migration on sub -hourly scale. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 

199, 116874.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chaos.2025.116874 

[36]  Louriki, M. (2022). Brownian bridge with random length and pinning point for modelling of financial information. 

Stochastics, 94(7), 973 -1002.  https://doi.org/10.1080/17442508.2021.2017438 

[37]  Louriki, M. (2025). The impact of pinning points on memorylessness in LГ©vy random bridges. Journal of Applied 

Probability, 62(1), 172 -187.  https://doi.org/10.1017/jpr.2024.51 

[38]  Yoshioka, H. (2026a). A minimization principle behind the diffusion bridge of diurnal fish migration, 

Mathematical Biosciences, 396, 109684.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2026.109684 

[39]  Yoshioka, H. (2026b). Multiple timescales in collective motion: daily and intraday upstream fish migration 

focusing on Feller condition. Physica A. In press.  http://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06606 

[40]  Monthus, C., & Mazzolo, A. (2022). Conditioned diffusion processes with an absorbing boundary condition for 

finite or infinite horizon. Physical Review E, 106(4), 044117. DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.106.044117 

[41]  Baker, E. L., Yang, G., Severinsen, M. L., Hipsley, C. A., & Sommer, S. (2024). Conditioning non -linear and 

infinite -dimensional diffusion processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37, 10801 -10826. 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/file/14ad9256c430e6c8977e470d8e268320 -Paper -

Conference.pdf 

[42]  Zhang, R., Huang, Y., Cao, Y., & Wang, H. (2026). Molebridge: Synthetic space projecting with discrete markov 

bridges. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 38, 162043 -162062. 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2025/file/ed2e1bfa8721d7cb04b8f6f92ab8c0ba -Paper -

Conference.pdf 

[43]  Chen, Y., & Georgiou, T. (2015). Stochastic bridges of linear systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 

61(2), 526 -531.  https://doi.org/10.1109/TAC.2015.2440567 

[44]  Mazzolo, A. (2017). Constraint Ornstein -Uhlenbeck bridges. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 58(9). 

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5000077 

[45]  Watanabe, S., Iida, M., Lord, C., Keith, P., & Tsukamoto, K. (2014). Tropical and temperate freshwater 

amphidromy: a comparison between life history characteristics of Sicydiinae, ayu, sculpins and galaxiids. 

Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 24(1), 1 -14.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11160 -013 -9316 -837 

[46]  Sakai, A. (2010). Forecast of the first ascending day and number of ascending ayu  Plecoglossus altivelis altivelis 

in rivers flowing into Lake Biwa. Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi, 76(4), 670 -677. In Japanese with English Abstract. 

https://doi.org/10.2331/suisan.76.670 

[47]  Tago, Y. (2002). Migration behaviors of sea -run ayu  Plecoglossus altivelis  (Pisces) in Toyama Bay, Japan. Nippon 

Suisan Gakkaishi, 68(4), 554 -563. In Japanese with English Abstract.  https://doi.org/10.2331/suisan.68.554 

[48]  Yates, M. C., Wilcox, T. M., Kay, S., PeresвҖҗNeto, P., & Heath, D. D. (2025). A framework to unify the relationship 

between numerical abundance, biomass, and environmental DNA. Environmental DNA, 7(2), e70073. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/edn3.70073 

[49]  Karatzas, I., & Shreve, S. (2014). Brownian motion and stochastic calculus. Springer, New York. 

[50]  Hefter, M., & Herzwurm, A. (2018). Strong convergence rates for Cox вҖ“Ingersoll вҖ“Ross processes вҖ”full parameter 

range. Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 459(2), 1079 -1101. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmaa.2017.10.076 

[51]  Abi Jaber, E. (2025). Simulation of square -root processes made simple: applications to the Heston model. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2412.11264. 

[52]  Abi Jaber, E., & Attal, E. (2025). Simulating integrated Volterra square -root processes and Volterra Heston 

models via Inverse Gaussian. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19885. 

[53]  Abi Jaber, E., Attal, E., & Rosenbaum, M. (2025). From Hyper Roughness to Jumps as $ H ВҘto -1/2$. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2503.16985. 

[54]  Tsukamoto, K., & Uchida, K. (1992). Migration Mechanism of the ayu, in Oceanic and Anthropogenic Controls 

of Life in the Pacific Ocean, Ilyichev, V.I. and Anikiev, V.V., eds., Springer, Dordrecht, 145 -172. 10.1007/978 -

94 -011 -2773 -8_12 

[55]  Tajima, A. (2023). Historical overview of poultry in Japan. The Journal of Poultry Science, 60(2), 2023015. 

https://doi.org/10.2141/jpsa.2023015 

[56]  Kuroda, K., Mori, T., Yuasa, H., & Uchida, K. (2026).  Recovery of plant species and functional diversity from 

anthropogenic impacts on the river embankment. Plant Ecology, 227(3), 29.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11258 -025 -

01590 -2

[57]  Mousumi, K. A., Onishi, T., Sueyoshi, M., Harada, M., & Hiramatsu, K. (2025). River water temperature 

variability: classification, diurnal change, and precipitation impacts in Nagara River tributaries. Hydrological 

Research Letters, 19(4), 327 -334.  https://doi.org/10.3178/hrl.25 -00031 

[58]  Nagayama, S., Ohta, T., Fujii, R., Harada, M., & Iizuka, T. (2025). Habitat use and growth strategies of 

amphidromous fish вҖңayuвҖқ throughout a river system. Scientific Reports, 15(1), 18695. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -025 -02988 -8

[59]  Aino, S., Yodo, T., & Yoshioka, M. (2015). Changes in the composition of stock origin and standard length of 

ayu  Plecoglossus altivelis altivelis  during the Tomozuri angling season in the Nagara River, central Japan. 

Fisheries science, 81(1), 37 -42.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s12562 -014 -0822 -y

[60]  Iritani, R., Oshima, K., Oda, T., Sasaki, O., Oki, K., Miyamoto, H., & Hirabayashi, Y. (2025). Historical water 

temperature change in Japan over the past several decades. Hydrological Research Letters, 19(4), 260 -267. 

https://doi.org/10.3178/hrl.25 -00018 

[61]  Itsukushima, R., Ohtsuki, K., & Sato, T. (2024).  Drivers of rising monthly water temperature in river estuaries. 

Limnology and Oceanography, 69(3), 589 -603.  https://doi.org/10.1002/lno.12507 

[62]  Miya, M., Sato, Y., Fukunaga, T., Sado, T., Poulsen, J.Y., & Sato K. et al. (2015). MiFish, a set of universal PCR 

primers for metabarcoding environmental DNA from fishes: Detection of more than 230 subtropical marine 

species. Royal Society Open Science, 2 , 150088.  https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.150088 

[63]  Kawaida, S., Horinouchi, M., Kurata, K., & Toda, K. (2025). Differences in benthic assemblage structures 

between vegetated and unvegetated habitats in a salt marsh in Lake Shinji, western Japan. Fisheries Science, 

91(1), 33 -46.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s12562 -024 -01831 -9

[64]  Yajima, H., & Yoshioka, Y. (2025). Response of interconnected estuarine lakes to sea -level rise and large 

hydrological structures. Journal of Hydrology: Regional Studies, 59, 102432. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrh.2025.102432 

[65]  Asaeda, T., GarcГӯa de JalГіn, D., OвҖҷHare, M., & Rahman, M. (2025).  Sequential riparian vegetation alteration in 

Japanese river landscapes. International Journal of River Basin Management, 23(1), 183 -195. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2023.2273843 

[66]  Kotani, T., Gotoh, T., & Fukuoka, S. (2024).  Development of an integrated analysis method for rainfall runoff, 

flood flow and sediment transport in the Hii river and its application for basin -wide flood control. Advances in 

River Engineering, 30, 453 -458. In Japanese.  https://doi.org/10.11532/river.30.0_453 

[67]  Yoshioka, H., Tsujimura, M., & Yoshioka, Y. (2026). Fishery resources management. Chapter 6 in the book: 

Yoshioka H., Tsujimura M. (Eds.): Stochastic Analysis and Control in Energy, Environmental and Resource 

Management Applications, Elsevier. 

[68]  MorgadoвҖҗGamero, W. B., Tournayre, O., & Cristescu, M. E. (2025). Comparative Decay Dynamics and 

Detectability of eDNA and eRNA in Connected and Isolated Freshwater Mesocosms Using Digital PCR. 

Molecular Ecology Resources, 25(8), e70028.  https://doi.org/10.1111/1755 -0998.70028 38 

[69]  Snyder, E. D., Tank, J. L., Pruitt, A. N., Peters, B., BrandГЈoвҖҗDias, P. F., Curtis, E. M., ... & Lamberti, G. A. (2025). 

Warming Increases Environmental DNA (eDNA) Removal Rates in Flowing Waters. Environmental DNA, 7(3), 

e70094.  https://doi.org/10.1002/edn3.70094 

[70]  Doi, H., Inui, R., Akamatsu, Y., Kanno, K., Yamanaka, H., Takahara, T., & Minamoto, T. (2017).  Environmental 

DNA analysis for estimating the abundance and biomass of stream fish. Freshwater Biology, 62(1), 30 -39. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/fwb.12846 

[71]  Talarico, L., Petrosino, G., Rossi, A. R., Franchini, P., & Tancioni, L. (2026). Controlled Experiments Reveal 

Moderate, Nonlinear Relationships Between eDNA Concentration and Fish Biomass in Three Freshwater Species 

of Monitoring Relevance. Ecology and Ev olution, 16(2), e73129.  https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.73129 

[72]  Henze, N. (2024). Asymptotic Stochastics. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

[73]  Jo, T. S., Murakami, H., & Nakadai, R. (2025). Spatial dispersal of environmental DNA particles in lentic and 

marine ecosystems: An overview and synthesis. Ecological Indicators, 174, 113469. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2025.113469 

[74]  Perry, W. B., Milner, N., JГўms, I. B., de Bruyn, M., Ormerod, S. J., Deiner, K., ... & Creer, S. (2025). Quantitative 

insights into the spatioвҖҗtemporal variation of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) biomass in a river catchment using 

eDNA metabarcoding. Journa l of Fish Biology. Published online.  https://doi.org/10.1111/jfb.70172 

[75]  Jo, T. S., & Doi, H. (2026). Does Allometric Scaling Improve Estimates of Population Abundance Based on 

Environmental DNA?.  Molecular Ecology, 35(6), e70303.  https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.70303 

[76]  Mao, X. (2007). Stochastic differential equations and applications. Elsevier. 

[77]  Jacod, J., & Protter, P. (2004). Probability Essentials. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

[78]  Yoshioka, H., Unami, K., & Kawachi, T. (2012).  Stochastic process model for solute transport and the associated 

transport equation. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 36(4), 1796 -1805. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2011.09.011