Title: Improving Lunar Topography with Deep Learning Schrödinger Bridges

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14638v1

Published Time: Mon, 15 Jun 2026 01:14:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Improving Lunar Topography with Deep Learning Schr¨ odinger Bridges 

# Matthew Repasky ∗1, Erwan Mazarico 2, Michael K. Barker 2, Stefano Bertone 2,3,4 , Terence J. Sabaka 2, and Yao Xie 11 H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA  

> 2

NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA  

> 3

Center for Research and Exploration in Space Science and Technology (CRESST II), University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA  

> 4

National Institute for Astrophysics (INAF), Astrophysical Observatory of Turin, 10025 Pino Torinese (TO), Italy 

This is the version of the article before peer review or editing, as submitted by an author to The Planetary Science Journal. IOP Publishing Ltd is not responsible for any errors or omissions in this version of the manuscript or any version derived from it. The Version of Record is available online at 10.3847/PSJ/ae6244 (Matthew Repasky et al 2026 Planet. Sci. J. 7 139) 

Abstract 

Increasing the resolution of planetary topography models can enable a better under-standing of surface processes and geomorphology; however, existing analytical super-resolution methods are expensive and difficult to apply at large scales. Generative models provide the tools to learn complex relationships within data and can be applied at scale due to hardware accelerators and parallelization. We present a diffusion-based Schr¨ odinger Bridge (SB) generative modeling approach for lunar topography super-resolution, connecting the distribution of low-resolution topography to that of high-resolution topography, incorporating physically-constraining optical imagery. Our approach is inspired by existing Shape-from-Shading methods, which improve a priori 

low-resolution topography by using optical images at the target resolution. We train SBs on a novel dataset of rendered lunar topography, emulating optical imagery from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Narrow Angle Camera. The result is a flexible ap-proach for topography super-resolution which can provide pixel-level uncertainties in the reconstruction. 

Unified Astronomy Thesaurus concepts: Lunar surface — Lunar science — The Moon — Neural networks — Remote sensing 

> ∗

Email: mwrepasky@gmail.com 

1

> arXiv:2606.14638v1 [cs.CV] 12 Jun 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Topography models of planetary surfaces derived from orbiter measurements provide infor-mation about surface processes and the geological history of planetary bodies. For example, Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) based upon measurements made by the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) onboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) represent to-pography at varying resolution across the lunar surface (Barker et al., 2016, 2023). However, their limited resolution inhibits the analysis of small-scale surface features, which could pro-vide insight into current surface processes such as mass wasting and micrometeorite bom-bardment. Moreover, characterization of landing-site topography at scales relevant to human and robotic exploration can support NASA’s Artemis lunar exploration missions (Barker et al., 2021). Analytical methods for improving the resolution of a priori DEMs typically incorporate additional data sources, such as optical imagery. For instance, the LRO Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) and Korea Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter (KPLO) ShadowCam resolve the lunar surface down to 1-3 meters-per-pixel (mpp) (Robinson et al., 2010, 2017). Shape-from-shading (SfS) refers to a class of methods utilizing brightness information from optical imagery (see, e.g., Alexandrov and Beyer, 2018; Fernandes and Mosegaard, 2022), to yield DEMs of higher resolution than those created using stereophotogrammetry (Henriksen et al., 2017). However, they are relatively inflexible, requiring expert-tuned parameters and precise specification of illumination and viewing angles. Additionally, these methods are expensive, hindering their application to large areas of interest for analysis and exploration. In computer vision, generative models have been applied to solve inverse problems such as Super-Resolution (SR), which is concerned with increasing the pixel resolution of array inputs. Diffusion models, in particular, have recently arisen as a powerful class of generative model (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020). Such models can be leveraged for conditional image synthesis techniques such as guidance of the generative process using class labels (Song et al., 2020; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) or infusion of the conditional data into the neural network (Rombach et al., 2022). Generally, conditional models take contextual information into account when synthesizing data. Image SR diffusion models (Saharia et al., 2022b,a) take the degraded data as input into the diffusion model neural network to yield high-resolution output, outperforming conditional synthesis approaches based upon predecessor generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Despite their advantages, typical diffusion models initialize the generative process with random noise, which may be inefficient. The image-to-image Schr¨ odinger bridge (SB) method is a generative modeling approach whose training and generation procedures are based on diffusion; however, they initialize synthesis with the a priori (degraded) data (Liu et al., 2023). In image reconstruction tasks such as SR, SBs yield demonstrably better reconstructions than those synthesized via diffusion (Liu et al., 2023). Due to the high dimension and complexity of remote sensing data, deep learning and computer vision methods have been applied to many geophysical problems. Generally, these methods avoid user-tunable parameters via data-driven function approximation, trading off up-front computation (training neural networks) for rapid inference (producing high-resolution data products). For example, prior works have applied deep generative mod-els to SR of satellite optical image data using GANs (Hu et al., 2024; Delgado-Centeno et al., 2023), normalizing flows (Heintz et al., 2023), and diffusion (Illarionova et al., 2023). 2Figure 1: The SB method for topography SR transforms a priori low-resolution topography into high-resolution reconstructions, taking a set of high-resolution images as additional conditional input. Multiple samples from the SB model can be used to create uncertainty maps. Delgado-Centeno et al. (2023) developed a GAN approach for the SR of NAC imagery, which can then be used for downstream tasks such as building topography models. Other works have directly applied similar methods for SR of planetary topography models. In particular, GANs have been applied for topography SR on Mars, constraining high-resolution topog-raphy using optical imagery (Tao et al., 2021a,b, 2022). However, the generative modeling literature suggests that diffusion-based approaches outperform GANs in both unconditional synthesis (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) and in conditional generation tasks, such as those re-lated to inverse problems (Chung et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). Cutting-edge diffusion-based generative modeling techniques such as SBs have yet to be applied directly to topography SR. In this work, we develop a machine learning method to increase the resolution of existing topography models when supplying the algorithm with a low-resolution a priori DEM and 3multiple corresponding optical images; see Figure 1 for a visualization. We propose a to-pography SR method based on the SB framework, advancing previous AI-based approaches for topography improvement. Inspired by SfS (see Alexandrov and Beyer (2018) and ref-erences therein), deep learning methods for topography super-resolution (Tao et al., 2022), and the superior performance of SBs (Liu et al., 2023), we define a conditional SB model which transforms a low-resolution, a priori DEM into a high-resolution counterpart given a set of target-resolution optical images as context. Intuitively, initializing the generative process with the low-resolution measurement is potentially more efficient than initializing it with pure noise, as is done in typical diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) and normalizing flows (Lipman et al., 2023). To develop and demonstrate our methodological approach, we work in a simulated setting with a preliminary evaluation of real data. We train SBs to recover LOLA DEMs at 20 mpp given a priori topography at 320 mpp and sets of rendered optical images emulating NAC images at 20 mpp. We emphasize that the goal of this work is to define and implement a new approach to topography SR based on some of the latest deep-learning methods. We show that, at this stage of experimentation, we obtain promising results, but that further work will be required to make our method applicable to more general use in planetary science and more directly compete with established non-machine-learning SfS approaches. This manuscript is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give a detailed background and assessment of deep learning methods relevant to developing our chosen methodology. In Section 3, we show we build the necessary training dataset, from existing lunar topography models and for realistic illumination and observing conditions. Section 4 gives details on the implementation of our model, its training, and evaluation. In Section 5, we apply our trained model to large-scale topography reconstruction from imagery under increasingly realistic conditions. Finally, in Section 6, we summarize our findings. 

Notation. For brevity, we denote time dependence of functions f (·, t ) using a subscript 

ft. Let X denote a data manifold, for instance, X = Rd or X = Rd×d. We define Ω = 

C([0 , T ], X ) as the set of all continuous X -valued functions on the time interval [0 , T ]. A

path measure is defined as any positive measure P on Ω (L´ eonard, 2014). Given time-marginal measures Pt as the push-forward of P to a time t ∈ [0 , T ], the associated marginal probability density is denoted pt(xt) for xt ∈ X , i.e., d Pt = ptdxt. Superscripts DM and SB are used to distinguish between measures and densities associated with Diffusion Models and Schr¨ odinger Bridges, respectively; see Section 2 for details. Finally, we denote the Laplacian by ∆ xf = ∇x · ∇ xf .

# 2 Topography Super-Resolution & Generative Models 

In this work, we formulate the task of increasing the resolution of planetary topography models in the framework of imaging super-resolution (SR), which in machine learning refers to a category of methods for increasing the resolution of raster array dataset (Nasrollahi and Moeslund, 2014; Anwar et al., 2020). Moreover, following modern deep learning SR approaches, we formulate this task as posterior sampling (Chung et al., 2023). Specifically, let xT represent an a priori low-resolution DEM. SR can be posed as condi-4Figure 2: Diffusion models (a) link a data-generating distribution (high-resolution DEMs) to the Gaussian distribution (white noise) via an SDE, while SBs (b) link two arbitrarily complicated distributions. (c) The reverse-time dynamics of these samplers can be modeled using vision transformers. Representing these models in the latent space of a VAE (d) is often more efficient. tional sampling: 

x0 ∼ pA(·| xT , Y), (1) where x0 is a high-resolution patch corresponding to the same spatial region as xT and Y

contains additional contextual information about x0 (e.g., Y := {yj }Jj=1 ). Equation 1 sug-gests that the high-resolution DEM is randomly distributed according to pA, a distribution conditioned on xT and Y. This framework is inspired by SfS, which increases the resolution of topography provided high-resolution image context. Topography and imagery are typically represented by high-dimensional raster arrays (i.e., arrays with a large number of pixels). Therefore, approximating the posterior (Equation 1) via classical and analytical methods is intractable for moderately-sized problems. This is further complicated by the fact that the parametric form of pA is unknown and complicated in general. Hence, modern computer vision techniques for SR rely on deep learning tech-niques. The probabilistic formulation of Equation 1 naturally lends itself to tools developed within the evolving field of generative modeling, and such techniques are commonly applied to modern SR problems (Saharia et al., 2022b,a; Chung et al., 2023). Modern deep gener-ative models (Song et al., 2020; Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) act as samplers from intractable data distributions, and can be conditioned on added contextual information. In this work, we apply generative modeling to approximate the sampling of Equation 1. The following sub-sections provide a brief review of relevant generative modeling frame-5works, followed by an overview of neural network function approximators typically applied for learning generative models. Modern methods define a path measure P interpolating be-tween pA and another probability density pB. In Section 2.1, we described how diffusion models define pB as an analytically tractable density, e.g., a centered Gaussian N (0 , I ). SBs, defined in Section 2.2, generalize diffusion such that pB is also a complicated, data-generating density (an a priori distribution). The generative process is a data dynamic xt for t ∈ [0 , T ]transforming xT ∼ pB into a sample ˆ x0 distributed approximately according to pA, the “tar-get” distribution. This allows one to more directly persist information from the a priori 

data to recover high-resolution topography. Section 2.3 details how SB can be applied to diffusion-like problems, and Section 2.4 presents how, in this work, we propose a SB problem to approximate posterior sampling via Equation 1. 

# 2.1 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models 

Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020) are defined by a system of forward- and reverse-time stochastic differential equations (SDEs) that share marginal densities pDM  

> t

(An-derson, 1982): dxt = ft(xt)d t + pβtdwt, x0 ∼ pA, (2) dxt = ft(xt) − βt∇xt log pDM  

> t

(xt) dt + pβtd ¯ wt, xT ∼ pB, (3) where ft is the time-varying drift, βt is a user-defined variance schedule, and d wt/d ¯ wt is an infinitesimal Wiener process in forward/reverse time. For appropriately specified βt and ft

linear in xt, Equation 2 simulates pB := N (0 , I ) by large enough time t = T and Equation 3 simulates pA starting from Gaussian noise at time T . The unconditional generative process defined by diffusion models is visualized in Figure 2(a). Deep generative models based on diffusion approximate the score function ∇xt log pDM  

> t

(xt)using a neural network uθt (xt) parameterized by θ. Given uθt (xt) ≈ ∇ xt log pDM  

> t

(xt), Equa-tion 3 can be numerically simulated to produce samples from pA. In practice, this ap-proximation is conducted using an objective function resembling Denoising Score Matching (DSM) (Vincent, 2011): 

θ⋆ = arg min 

> θ

E ∥uθt (xt) − σt∇xt log pDM  

> t

(xt|x0)∥, (4) where σ2 

> t

= R t 

> 0

βτ dτ and the expected value is over x0 ∼ pA, t ∼ U (0 , T ), and xt ∼ pDM  

> t

(·| x0). This objective has minimizer uθ⋆ 

> t

(xt) ≈ ∇ xt log pDM  

> t

(xt). The conditional score can be com-puted analytically, as ∇xt log pDM  

> t

(xt|x0) = ( xt −x0)/σ 2 

> t

, since the forward-process conditional density has a known Gaussian closed form (Song and Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020), which makes the objective of Equation 4 tractable. Given uθ⋆ 

> t

and some xT ∼ pB, Equation 3 can be simulated via recursive posterior sampling, otherwise known as ancestral sampling (Song et al., 2020), xt−1 ∼ pθ(xt−1|xt): 

xt−1 = 1

√1 − βt

 xt + βtuθ⋆ 

> t

(xt) + pβtξ, ξ ∼ N (0 , I ). (5) 62.2 The Schr¨ odinger Bridge Problem 

The SB problem is concerned with identifying a path measure connecting two arbitrary distributions (Schr¨ odinger, 1932; L´ eonard, 2014). In this work, these distributions represent the low- and high-resolution topography, and the path measure is an interpolation between them. This can be expressed as follows (Pavon and Wakolbinger, 1991; Chen et al., 2022): 

Q⋆ = arg min 

> Q

DKL (Q∥P) such that dP0 = pAdx0, dPT = pBdxT . (6) That is, given some “reference measure” P, the objective is the closest path measure Q⋆ to 

P which has pA and pB as initial and terminal marginal densities, respectively. When the reference measure P is the path measure of the diffusion SDEs (Equations 2 and 3), the solution Q⋆ to Equation 6 can be determined using the potentials Ψt and ˆΨt, which are the solutions to the following system of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) (Caluya and Halder, 2021; Chen et al., 2022): 

∂Ψt

∂t = − (∇xt Ψt) · ft − βt

2 ∆xt Ψt,∂ ˆΨt

∂t = −∇ xt ·

 ˆΨtft



+ βt

2 ∆xt ˆΨt,

such that Ψ0 ˆΨ0 = pA, ΨT ˆΨT = pB.

(7) The marginal density of the optimal path measure Q⋆ is pSB  

> t

(xt) = Ψ t(xt) ˆΨt(xt) for every 

t ∈ [0 , T ]. Moreover, this path measure and the associated marginal densities correspond to the following system of SDEs: dxt = {ft(xt) + βt∇xt log Ψ t(xt)} dt + pβtdwt, x0 ∼ pA, (8) dxt =

n

ft(xt) − βt∇xt log ˆΨt(xt)

o

dt + pβtd ¯ wt, xT ∼ pB. (9) Similar to the approach taken with diffusion models, Equation 9 can be simulated in reverse time to transform samples xT ∼ pB into corresponding samples from pA. However, the key difference is that pB can be generalized to an arbitrarily complicated a priori distribution. The SB generative process linking two complicated distributions is visualized in Figure 2(b). To simulate the generative process, Ψ t and ˆΨt need to be obtained as solutions to the system of PDEs. There exist many methods to approximate these potentials, including segmentation of the bridge into many portions that can be solved analytically (Wang et al., 2021), using iterative proportional fitting methods (De Bortoli et al., 2021; Vargas et al., 2021), or via forward-backward SDEs theory (Chen et al., 2022). 

# 2.3 Image-to-Image Schr¨ odinger Bridges 

Image-to-Image SBs (Liu et al., 2023) approximate the SB potential ˆΨt using an approach similar to the approach used to learn diffusion models (Song et al., 2020). However, diffusion modeling techniques cannot immediately be applied to learn the dynamics of SBs due to the 7nonlinearity of the drift terms in the SDE Equation 8. Liu et al. (2023) consider the tractable, linear SDE: dxt = ft(xt)d t + pβtdwt, x0 ∼ ˆΨ0, (10) whose limiting distribution is Gaussian. Analogous to the diffusion forward-time SDE (Equation 2), Equation 10 shares marginal densities with a reverse-time SDE with drift 

ft − βt∇xt log ˆΨt: the SDE of Equation 9. Given x0 ∼ ˆΨ0, conditional densities ˆΨ( xt|x0) of Equation 10 are analytically tractable. This suggests that diffusion modeling techniques can be employed to learn uθ⋆ 

> t

(xt) ≈ ∇ xt log ˆΨt(xt) via a DSM-like objective function: 

θ⋆ = arg min 

> θ

E ∥uθt (xt) − σt∇xt log pDM  

> t

(xt|x0)∥, (11) where the expected value is over x0 ∼ pA, xT ∼ pB(·| x0), t ∼ U (0 , T ), and xt ∼ pSB  

> t

(·| x0, x T ). However, two computational challenges must be addressed: (i) sampling x0 ∼ ˆΨ0 is not tractable in general and (ii) the path measure induced by Equation 10 is not the same as that induced by Equations 8 and 9, i.e., Q⋆ of Equation 6. To address issue (i), Liu et al. (2023) define pA := δa(x), the Dirac delta distribution centered at a ∈ X . This eliminates one of the couplings in the constraints of Equation 7, resulting in ˆΨ0 = δa, from which samples ( a ∼ δa) can be produced trivially. To consider (ii), note that one cannot simply sample xt ∼ pDM  

> t

(xt|x0) induced by Equation 10 when computing the DSM objective (Equation 11), as this will not accurately represent the path between pA and pB (instead, it corresponds to a path between pA and a Gaussian). To address this, Liu et al. (2023) derive an analytic posterior pSB (xt|x0, x T ) for boundary pair x0 ∼ pA and xT ∼ pB, which they prove is equivalent to the marginal form of the diffusion recursive posterior density p(xt|xt+1 ) of Equation 5. Therefore, when training, xt can be sampled directly from pSB (xt|x0, x T ) given boundary pairs. For sampling, xT ∼ pB(xT |x0) can be input to ancestral sampling to yield corresponding samples x0 ∼ pA(x0). To summarize, the generative dynamics of the Image-to-Image SB can be modeled by a neural network via the minimization of Equation 11. 

# 2.4 Topography Super-Resolution Schr¨ odinger Bridges 

We train a SB model for 16 × super-resolution (320 mpp to 20 mpp) of lunar DEMs. Let 

x0 ∈ R96 ×96 and xT ∈ R96 ×96 represent high- and low-resolution DEMs, respectively, and let the contextual information be a (variable-size J) set of 20 mpp optical images: Y := {yj }Jj=1 

where yj ∈ R96 ×96 . We define an SB connecting xT ∼ pB to x0 ∼ pA, conditioned on Y.Due to the high-dimension (number of pixels) and complex structure of x0, xT , and Y, we optimize the parameters θ of a deep neural network uθt representing the SB dynamics using Equation 11, which is common practice for generative modeling and SR (Song et al., 2020; Saharia et al., 2022a). Transformers represent the state-of-the-art in deep neural networks, which utilize the “attention” mechanism to relate disparate features in high-dimensional, structured data such as text (Vaswani et al., 2017). Such architectures have been adapted to vision gen-erative modeling tasks in recent years (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Peebles and Xie, 2023), dubbed vision transformers (ViTs) and diffusion transformers (DiTs). Additionally, many 8Figure 3: In (a), illumination directions are defined using a Fibonacci lattice across the sky to represent the entire spectrum of illumination conditions. More realistic illumination (b) is considered by randomly determining a location of the DEM patch on the lunar surface, corresponding to an arc of possible illumination directions. Rendered images with illumina-tion directions near this arc are chosen as “realistic”. In both columns of (b), the assumed longitude of the patch is 0 ° E. The left column assumes the latitude is 40 ° N while the right assumes 88 ° N. modern generative models mitigate the computational expense of modeling in the high-dimensional data space by defining a utility latent space , represented by a variational au-toencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rombach et al., 2022). In this work, we train a SB model in the latent space of a VAE, and the generative dynamics of the SB are modeled by a DiT. See Appendix A for an in-depth background of neural network models and autoencoders used in this work, and see Section 4.1 for the specific implementation for lunar topography SR. Given a trained lunar topography SB, high-resolution topography products can be cre-ated using few function evaluations of the trained network. Moreover, application of this model requires minimal user fine-tuning or specification, as surface conditions such as illu-mination and viewing angles are not required as input, unlike many traditional approaches. Training deep neural networks to model SB dynamics via Equation 11 requires a large train-ing dataset. In the following section, we outline this training dataset, which utilizes high-resolution topography data from the lunar surface, and rendered optical images emulating NAC imagery. 93 Rendered Lunar Topography Dataset 

This work applies deep generative SR techniques to lunar topography data. Due to the high quality of available topography data products near the poles at ≥ 20 m resolution, we focus on 20 mpp LOLA DEMs corresponding to both polar regions on the Moon pole-wards of 80 ° latitude (Barker et al., 2023, 2025). To create a dataset for training deep SR models, the DEMs are cut into 96 × 96-pixel patches (1 .92 × 1.92 km) representing the target (“true”) high-resolution topography. Due to variable LOLA altimetric data density coverage across the lunar surface, patches with few ( <2,242, or ∼24%) altimetry-defined (non-interpolated) pixels are discarded. The result is a dataset of 91,708 patches, which is split into an 80%/10%/10% partition for model training, validation, and testing, respectively. We generate multiple rendered images of every DEM patch, to associate each with a set of simulated optical measurements (i.e., the contextual information). This is conducted using raytracing-based illumination software (Bertone, 2024) for rendering shape models of planetary topography (Mazarico et al., 2011; Potter et al., 2023; Mazarico et al., 2018). We create two rendered datasets corresponding to the set of 91,708 DEM patches, which are described in the subsequent sub-sections. Each dataset defines the positions of the Sun in the sky for the set of images in a different manner. Individual rendered images from these datasets are meant to emulate NAC-like imagery to be provided as contextual information for SR models of lunar topography. 

# 3.1 Fibonacci Lattice Illumination Dataset 

For each DEM patch, 30 Sun positions are specified via a Fibonacci lattice across the sky (hemisphere), where each sun position is perturbed by a small amount of random noise. The goal is to uniformly represent direct solar illumination from all possible directions, not necessarily representing a set of realistically observable illumination directions. See Figure 3(a) for a demonstration of this definition of illumination directions. Given this set of Sun positions for a particular DEM patch, a set of images is rendered using point source solar illumination. During training with this dataset, the entire set of 30 images is provided for each DEM patch for SR. The purpose of training using this dataset is to initially orient the model, giving a sense of all possible illumination directions and how to relate topography to optical information. Additional fine-tuning of models to more realistic scenarios is conducted using the dataset described in the next subsection. 

# 3.2 Realistic Illumination Dataset 

The set of illumination directions for a particular DEM patch in the Fibonacci lattice dataset is not generally realistically observable from a fixed location on the lunar surface. For a fixed location (longitude-latitude), the Sun can only be positioned within a solid-angle “band” across the sky, above the horizon (which we take into account when raytracing, along with neighboring topography surrounding each DEM patch). We make a simple assumption: given the position of the patch, the illumination direction is bound to an arc. The DEM patch can be associated with a set of realistically-illuminated images whose illumination directions are ”sufficiently close” to this arc. In practice, during training, we define the 10 Figure 4: Missing data in rendered images emulates realistic observation patterns in NAC optical images. A band of observed pixels is defined in each fully rendered image, and pixels outside of this range are discarded. This set of images represents a partial observation of the same setting displayed in the middle panel of Figure 3. longitude/latitude of each patch randomly during each pass over the dataset, such that each patch will have a different set of realistic (feasible) images each time it is considered during training. Therefore, for each patch, we require a large set of rendered images corresponding to a sufficiently dense set of illumination directions. For all DEM patches, the illumination directions of the rendered images are at fixed elevations of 5 °, 10 °, 20 °, 30 °, 45 °, 60 °, 75 °, and 85 ° from the horizon. For the lower elevations (5,10,20,30 °), illumination directions are defined every 5 ° in azimuth (72 “longitudinal” sun positions per elevation “ring”). The remaining rings at elevations 45 °, 60 °, 75 °, and 85 ° consist of illumination directions with azimuth spacings of 10 °, 20 °, 30 °, and 60 °, respectively. Each DEM patch is thus rendered a total of 360 times (once per illumination direction). At training and evaluation time, a subset of these rendered images is considered “realistically observable” depending upon the patch’s randomly selected location on the lunar surface. Figure 3(b) demonstrates the definition of the valid illumination angle arc, which corresponds to a set of rendered images. This arc depends upon the longitude and latitude of the DEM patch. 

# 3.3 Missing Optical Data 

In many realistic settings, individual optical data products will not fully capture the region-of-interest (the DEM patch). Using a fixed viewing window defined by the DEM patch coordinates, this phenomenon can be defined as missing pixels in an individual image. The ability of SR methods to handle missing data is therefore crucial for application to realistic settings. To address such scenarios during training, before an image is provided to the model, a slice of “observed” pixels is determined. NAC-like measurement patterns can be represented by a “band” of observations. To emulate such observations in rendered imagery, for a given image, a pair of parallel lines are selected (with some randomly-determined distance), and the pixels outside of this band are discarded. In Figure 4, typical observed data patterns for rendered image patches are shown. During training and evaluation, missing pixels are encoded by setting their pixel values to -1. The intuition is that a model trained 11 with such data will learn to ignore regions of images that are missing. 

# 4 Training and Evaluation 

In this section, we outline the parameterization and training of a SB model to solve the posterior sampling problem of Equation 1. That is, given low-resolution a priori topography and high-resolution image context, a SB model is used to produce high-resolution topography reconstructions (see Section 2.4 for model details). This is accomplished via training and evaluation on the rendered topography datasets of Section 3. To produce reconstructions for a given DEM, a single sample can be drawn from the pre-trained SB model. However, due to the stochasticity of the sampling scheme, multiple samples can be drawn to compute averages and standard deviations per pixel; the latter is denoted modeling uncertainty ˆ σ. The RMS modeling uncertainty can then be compared to the true RMS error as an assessment of the accuracy of uncertainty quantification. Evalua-tion metrics can be computed on either a single sample from the SB or on the (pixel-wise) mean aggregation of samples. This is especially important and valuable for scientific appli-cations, as well-calibrated, realistic error estimates for higher-resolution topographic models are critical to their use. Sets of reconstructed DEM patches are evaluated according to a range of metrics. Eleva-tion error can be quantified by the root-mean-square (RMS) elevation error, as well as the 75th and 95th percentiles of the elevation error distribution. To evaluate first-order features, we compute the average slope errors in the vertical and horizontal directions. To evalu-ate higher-order, “semantic” features, the Fr´ echet Inception Distance (FID) is used (Heusel et al., 2017), which is a common metric used for image evaluation in computer vision tasks. The Fr´ echet distance reflects the difference between two probability distributions (as opposed to two individual samples). FID compares the distribution of Inception-v3 output maps of the true data to the distribution of Inception-v3 output maps of the reconstructions, where Inception-v3 is a pre-trained convolutional neural network (CNN) (Szegedy et al., 2015) com-monly used for computer vision evaluation metrics. Intuitively, this extracts and evaluates features of the reconstructed data using pre-trained neural networks, assessing their fidelity with respect to the true distribution of high-resolution DEM patches. 

# 4.1 Model Parameterization 

In this sub-section, we outline the parameterization details for each component of the SB framework. First, we define a low-dimensional latent representation space for topography data. An SB is defined in this latent space, and the dynamics of this SB are modeled by a neural network. 

Latent Space Parameterization. We train a VAE to embed each high-resolution DEM patch x ∈ R96 ×96 into a low-dimensional representation z ∈ R4×12 ×12 . Following Rombach et al. (2022), the VAE is trained using a mixed objective to minimize reconstruction error and an adversarial objective. To parameterize the VAE networks, we use a residual CNN encoder Eϕ and decoder Dϕ (parameterized by ϕ), similar to the encoder/decoder arms of a 12 Table 1: SB application to the test dataset provided 75 images with missing data per patch. Method Elev. RMSE (m) Elev. Error 75th Perc. (m) Elev. Error 95th Perc. (m) RMS ˆσ (m) FID Horiz. Slope Error ( °)Vert. Slope Error ( °)Bicubic Interpolation 6.79 5.36 13.7 - 16.3 2.32 2.33 Main Phase (1 sample) 8.87 8.60 17.8 - 12.0 2.44 2.37 Main Phase (20 samples) 8.22 7.68 16.6 3.39 12.6 2.26 2.19 Illum. Fine Tune (1 sample) 6.97 7.39 13.8 - 12.4 2.76 2.75 Illum. Fine Tune (20 samples) 4.63 4.47 9.18 5.36 6.63 2.00 1.97 Missing Fine Tune (1 sample) 5.64 6.00 11.2 - 0.93 1.82 1.87 Missing Fine Tune (20 samples) 3.56 3.53 6.99 4.50 5.42 1.46 1.50 

> aAbbreviations denote elevation (Elev.), percentiles (Perc.), horizontal (Horiz.), and vertical (Vert.).

U-Net. See Appendix B for a detailed description of the VAE neural network architecture and optimization. 

Schr¨ odinger Bridge Parameterization. We define an SB in the latent space of the topography VAE. In this case, pB represents the distribution of latent-space a priori DEMs, which is mapped to that of target-resolution DEMs, pA. Following Liu et al. (2023) for the parameterization of SB SDEs, we set ft = 0, and βt symmetrically peaks at a maximum of 

βT / 2 = βmax from β0 = βT = βmin :

βt = 2( βmin − βmax )

T t − T

2 + βmax ,

where βmax = 3 × 10 −4, βmin = 10 −4, and T = 1000. The SB connects the distribution of high-resolution latent-space DEMs, z0 := Eϕ(x0) ∼ pA, to that of low-resolution latent-space DEMs, zT := Eϕ(xT ) ∼ pB. As in Equation 10, the forward-time SB SDE dynamic has the following form: dzt = pβtdwt, z0 ∼ ˆΨ0, (12) where ˆΨ0 = δa for some a ∼ pA.

Sampling Dynamic Parameterization. Given the VAE and a pre-defined SB, we can parameterize and learn the dynamics of the reverse process (low-resolution to high-resolution): dzt = −βt∇zt log ˆΨt(zt)d t + pβtd ¯ wt, zT ∼ pB. (13) At each step along the sampling trajectory, a neural network uθt receives zt (the partially-recovered latent representation) as input and yields an approximation of ∇zt log ˆΨt(zt), which can be used to simulate a step of the SDE. The sampling process is initialized at time T

with the VAE encoding of a low-resolution DEM patch xT bicubic-upsampled to the target resolution. In addition to taking the time t as conditional input, the network receives the low-resolution DEM xT and the set of rendered images Y as conditional input at each step of the sampling process to constrain the process towards generating true high-resolution topography. The dynamics are approximated using a ViT with convolutional encoders for conditional inputs; see Figure 5 for a visualization of the SB parameterized by a ViT and see Appendix C for a detailed description of the SB neural network architecture. In practice (and in all of the experiments outlined in this work), the sampling process can be conducted in as few as 10 steps simulating the SDE Equation 13. 13 Figure 5: Flow chart of the SB generative process. The main ViT takes the partially-generated patch from the previous time step as input to yield the next-time-step patch (see Appendix B for details of the VAE). Three pieces of conditional information are incorporated: the encoded generative process time step, an embedding of the a priori topography via another ViT, and an embedding of the set of images via a set convolutional encoder and a ViT. This conditional information (denoted “context”) is processed by the ViT in each time step (see Appendix C for a detailed description of the network architecture). 

# 4.2 Model Training 

In this section, we describe how neural network parameters are learned using the training datasets. The SB neural network parameters are learned via minimization of the DSM objective (Equation 4) corresponding to Equation 12. Given high-resolution DEMs, their 14 Figure 6: Evaluation metrics computed on 1,024 validation dataset patches throughout each phase of SB model training. The network parameters passed to the next phase are determined by selecting training iterations in which the validation metrics are small (vertical red lines). Training in the first stage is halted when FID is smallest, which also corresponds to low elevation MSE and slope error. Note the change in scale of the horizontal and vertical axes in the fine-tuning phases. low-resolution counterparts, and corresponding (rendered) imagery, an empirical form of the DSM objective can be computed at randomly-sampled times t. The objective is mini-mized with respect to the ViT parameters θ using AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019), a stochastic-gradient-descent-like first-order numerical optimization technique. The details of model training are outlined below. The models are trained using the set of lunar DEM patches described in Section 3, with additional augmentations, including random flips along the vertical and/or horizontal axes. These data are split into 80% (training), 10% (validation), and 10% (testing) partitions. First, the VAE parameters are learned using the VAE adversarial objective (Equation 15) computed on the training partition. Using the Adam optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with a batch size of 64, a learning rate of 4 .5 × 10 −6, betas 0.5 and 0.9, and otherwise default PyTorch parameters, the VAE was trained for approximately 1.94 million iterations, or 1,690 15 Figure 7: Elevation error of single-sample reconstructions on the 9,171 test dataset patches from the final fine-tuned model as a function of planetary latitude (a) and number of images (b). There is no significant relationship between elevation error with respect to latitude or the number of images. epochs (passes over the training dataset). See Appendix B for further details regarding the VAE optimization. The latent-space SB is trained using rendered data corresponding to the same 80% train-ing partition used to train the VAE. The main phase of SB training is conducted using the Fibonacci lattice rendered data described in Section 3.1. The intuition behind this choice is that the majority of the optimization time should focus on encoding lighting information for the entire spectrum of illumination conditions. Afterwards, two additional phases of “fine-tuning” optimization are conducted, initializing the weights of the neural network with those at the end of training from prior phases. First, the model is fine-tuned using the realistic illumination conditions described in Section 3.2 with no missing data. Additionally, each DEM patch is associated with a random number of images (from 5 to 30), such that each pixel will typically be non-shadowed in at least a few complementary images. Second, the model is further fine-tuned using the same realistic illumination conditions and a potentially larger random number of images (5-100 images) with the missing data pattern described in Section 3.3, where each image has a missing-data region. Given a set of N training points 



x(i)0 , x (i) 

> T

, Y(i)

Ni=1 

, the SB neural network can be opti-mized numerically. Specifically, the DSM minimization (Equation 4) can be conducted using an empirical version of the loss (Liu et al., 2023): 

θ⋆ = arg min 

> θN

X

> i=1

uθt(i)



z(i) 

> t(i)

, x (i) 

> T

, Y(i)



− z(i) 

> t(i)

− z(i)0

σt(i)

, (14) such that uθ⋆ 

> t

(zt, ·, ·) ≈ ∇ zt log ˆΨt(zt). In Equation 14, each t(i) ∼ Uniform(0 , 1) identically and independently, and z(i) 

> t(i)

∼ q



z(i) 

> t(i)

z(i)0 , z (i)

> T



, an analytic Gaussian posterior (Equation 16 Figure 8: The final fine-tuned SB model is applied to 5 DEMs patches (96 × 96 pixels at 20 mpp) when providing 5 images per DEM patch. Reconstructions are aggregated over 20 samples. 11 of Liu et al. (2023)). This minimization is conducted over mini-batches of the training dataset using AdamW with a batch size of 256, a learning rate of 10 −4, zero weight decay, and otherwise default PyTorch parameters. 17 Figure 9: In (a), the correlation between prediction uncertainty and MAE is visualized, with 1:1 line shown in red and quantiles of the column marginals shown as white lines. In (b), the ratio between the MAE and the prediction uncertainty is shown for six different test dataset patches. We find that the predicted uncertainty is typically within a factor of ∼2 of the true elevation MAE. SB model selection was conducted by identifying the stage of training with the best (lowest) evaluation metrics of the model reconstruction on a subset (1 , 024 patches) of the validation dataset. The model selected after the first phase of training (on Fibonacci lat-tice illumination angles) was trained for 260 , 260 iterations. The first phase of fine-tuning (realistic illumination) was conducted for 5 , 250 iterations, and the second phase (missing data) was conducted for 2 , 750 iterations. Evaluation metrics applied to this subset of the validation dataset throughout training are visualized in Figure 6. Notably, the fine-tuning phases do not require as many iterations of optimization to converge. This validates the intuition that the majority of information was learned by the model in the main phase of training. 

# 4.3 Model Evaluation 

The trained and fine-tuned SB models are evaluated at 16 × SR (320 mpp to 20 mpp) on the testing partition of the LOLA DEM patches dataset (Section 3) which consists of 9, 171 patches. 75 images with NAC-like missing data patterns are provided for each patch, 18 emulating realistically-observable sets of NAC images. For each SB model, either a single sample is produced or 20 samples are averaged (at the pixel level) to produce an aggregated reconstruction. In Table 1, the validation metrics computed on the patches reconstructed using each approach are displayed. Since the main phase model and first fine-tuned model are not trained for this realistic setting, they perform similarly to the baseline interpolation in the elevation and slope metrics, but the FID is significantly lower. This can be interpreted as follows: these models produce more realistic-looking DEMs than interpolation, but they are not consistent with the true topography. The fully fine-tuned model significantly outperforms interpolation and all prior models. Given a single sample from the SB, RMS elevation reconstruction error is 5-6 m, or 25%-30% of the pixel width. Additionally, slope errors are less than 2 degrees on average. Given 20 samples from the model, the elevation and slope errors decrease, with a slight increase in FID. This can be interpreted as a smoothing of the higher-order features due to aggregation of multiple samples, keeping the reconstruction consistent with elevation and first-order features. Note, however, that the FID of the aggregated reconstructions is still better than that of interpolation and previous models. The generalization capacity of the final fine-tuned model is assessed in Figure 7, which displays the RMS elevation error of single-sample reconstructions on 1,000 patches from the test dataset under different conditions. In Figure 7(a), the 75 images provided for each patch correspond to patches at fixed ranges of latitudes; the results indicate that the performance does not degrade dramatically with latitude. In Figure 7(b), the number of images provided to the model is varied from 5 to 75, and the performance only degrades slightly given fewer images. A set of reconstructions given 5 images per patch (assuming each patch is located at 0° E and 60 ° N) is shown in Figure 8. Consistent with the quantitative results, the aggregation of 20 samples smoothes some high-frequency features, potentially removing inaccurate small-scale topography and yielding an accurate overall reconstruction. Figure 9 demonstrates the capacity of the uncertainty provided by our approach to cap-ture the true reconstruction error. These results correspond to reconstructions of 50 test dataset patches (20 clones per patch) each provided with 30 images with missing data (as-suming 0 ° E and 60 ° N). At each pixel, we compare the prediction uncertainty, i.e., the standard deviation of 20 predictions per pixel, to the mean absolute error (MAE), i.e., the average of 20 absolute reconstruction errors per pixel. In Figure 9(a), the uncertainty can be seen to have an approximately linear relationship with the MAE; Pearson’s r is 0.63, indicating a weak linear correlation. This can be attributed to the off-linear heavy tail of the marginal distributions visualized in Figure 9(a). Despite this, the median MAE (solid white line) follows the 1:1 line (red) closely, suggesting that the predicted uncertainty is generally reasonably accurate. Figure 9(b) visualizes the ratio of MAE and prediction un-certainty, demonstrating that typical errors are on the order of at most a few ˆ σ. In some cases, uncertainty underestimation can be attributed to pixels not captured by any of the images. However, we find that the uncertainty underestimates the MAE in some other, less explainable cases as well. In general, the MAE is typically largest at locations in which the uncertainty is also largest, which are intuitively the locations where reconstructions should be least trusted. 19 Figure 10: A large area (19.2 × 19.2 km) is reconstructed using 37 rendered images (cor-responding to a feasible set of illumination directions for a patch at 0 ° E, 40 ° N). The reconstructed topography recovers true features not present in the a priori topography and the uncertainty map roughly tracks the true absolute error. 

# 5 Application to Large-Scale Topography 

We outline a mosaicing scheme for the application of the SB method to areas larger than 96 ×96 pixels. Our approach is similar to the sfs and dem mosaic functions of the Ames Stereo Pipeline (ASP) (Beyer et al., 2018), which improve and blend overlapping DEMs, respectively. However, unlike the sfs function of ASP, SB sampling allows for the com-putation of multiple predictions (clones) per patch, facilitating uncertainty analysis. The SB is applied as a moving window over a large region with some specified stride s, result-ing in overlapping reconstructed patches. The reconstruction for each pixel over the entire large area is produced via a weighted average of the pixels in each patch, where each pixel’s weight for a given reconstructed patch corresponds to its distance from the nearest edge of the patch. Specifically, a grassfire filter (weight is proportional to the square of the distance to the nearest edge) convolved with a Gaussian of width σf is applied to each patch before aggregation. The weighted standard deviation of each pixel can be computed using these weights as well. Multiple samples (‘clones’, similarly to e.g. , Lemoine et al. (2014)) of each patch can be generated by the model to yield more robust predictions. To represent a realistic scenario over a large area, we consider a region which is 19.2 20 Figure 11: The same large area as in Figure 10 (again assuming it is located at 0 ° E, 40 ° N) is reconstructed given 1,500 rendered images with NAC-like missing data patterns. 

× 19.2 km (960 × 960 pixels). This corresponds to a LOLA DEM patch centered at 0 ° Eand 85 ° S. The 16 × mean-downsampled DEM is provided as a priori . We render “rings” of images (360 images total) as described in Section 3.2. First, we apply the SB approach to this large area with realistic sets of rendered images without any missing data. That is, a realistic Sun trajectory is defined according to the assumed position of the region on the lunar surface. The SB method is applied with filter blur σf = 2 .0 and stride s = 960 meters, i.e., 48 pixels so that each patch overlaps 50% with adjacent patches. Four clones are produced for each patch. This reconstruction approach is applied at multiple assumed latitudes (with longitude 0 ° E), but we do not observe significant degradation in reconstruction based on the assumed location of the region. The reconstruction for the region when assumed to be located at 0 ° E, 40 ° N is shown in Figure 10. To consider a more realistic scenario, we also consider missing data in the provided images. Additionally, assuming the region is located at 0 ° E, 40 ° N, 1 , 500 images are provided to the model, which is approximately the number of real NAC images that could be available over a region at that latitude. Since each image includes missing data, multiple images illuminated from the same sun angle are provided. See Figure 11 for a visualization of the reconstruction, again using σf = 2 .0, stride s = 960, 4 clones per patch, and a 320 mpp (60 × 60 pixels) 

a priori LOLA DEM patch. In this case, the reconstruction is not as high-fidelity as that produced using a smaller set of “full” images (Figure 10), but small-length-scale features are 21 Figure 12: A region within the Faustini Rim A candidate landing region for the upcoming Artemis missions is reconstructed given 145 real NAC images. still recovered. Finally, we consider large-area reconstruction given real NAC images. Specifically, we consider the topography of a 19.2 × 19.2 km region (960 × 960 pixels at 20 mpp) within the Faustini Rim A Artemis candidate landing region. We use 145 real NAC images (downsam-pled to 20 mpp) to inform the SB reconstruction from a 320 mpp downsampled LOLA DEM (60 × 60 pixels). The same filter as in the other examples is used in this case ( σf = 2 .0 and stride s = 960 meters) and 4 clones are again produced for each patch. The reconstruction is visualized in Figure 12. The resulting DEM is not as high-quality as in the rendered data and there are more artifacts related to mosaicing, but the method still yields a reasonable high-resolution DEM, resolving smaller-scale features than the a priori . Some artifacts can be due to the relatively basic mosaic procedure, in addition to inherent differences between real and rendered imagery. 

# 6 Conclusions 

We have developed a SB-based method for topography SR on the Moon, yielding high-resolution terrain reconstructions via a stochastic sampling scheme. The SB is parameter-ized by a ViT neural network, which also takes into account high-resolution optical imagery, physically constraining the generative process. This method yields multiple reconstructions 22 for each input, permitting computation of statistics for each pixel, yielding mean reconstruc-tions and uncertainties. On a holdout test dataset of rendered lunar topography patches at 20 mpp, the method achieves a reconstruction error of 5-6 m. We also demonstrate the scalability of this method to arbitrarily large areas via a tiling and mosaicing scheme. Practical application of this method necessitates efficient and accurate application to large areas at high resolution. Our experiments reveal good performance in such cases using rendered optical imagery, with a final example application to downsampled real NAC imagery. Future work will focus on further fine-tuning to real NAC images and a focus on higher resolutions than 20 mpp. Specifically, since NAC images are 0.5-3 mpp in resolution, the next steps include training on renderings of real data at that resolution. This will require an extensive dataset of high-resolution topography data at that resolution, which does not currently exist. However, data can be gathered and generated using existing methods such as stereophotogrammetry and SfS. We emphasize that the developments highlighted in this work should not yet be directly compared with traditional SfS approaches - though potential advantages include speed (after training) and the ability to efficiently produce informative (accurate) uncertainties. A key advantage of traditional approaches is that they do not require training of a machine learning model, and can therefore operate at arbitrarily high resolutions. To effectively compare with such approaches at meter-level resolutions, a large training dataset of high-resolution topography with no artifacts would be required, which does not yet exist. At this stage, we demonstrate the potential for state-of-the-art deep learning tools in the area of lunar topography, and leave higher-resolution enhancements to future work. This work demonstrates the potential of generative modeling for improving the quality of remote sensing data, incorporating multiple such data sources. Current limitations include under-estimation of error in the uncertainty metric, which could be addressed by a more principled error estimation scheme, e.g., using normalizing flows. Additionally, more ad-vanced conditioning mechanisms can be investigated to better incorporate optical imagery, potentially leading to improved modeling accuracy and uncertainty. Extensions will focus on the adaptation of this method to more realistic settings and datasets. 

# Acknowledgments 

MR was supported through the NASA internship program. Support for this research was provided by NASA’s Planetary Science Division Research Program, through ISFM work package Planetary Geodesy at Goddard Space Flight Center. SB acknowledges support by NASA under award number 80GSFC24M0006. YX is partially supported by an NSF CA-REER CCF-1650913, NSF DMS-2134037, CMMI-2015787, CMMI-2112533, DMS-1938106, DMS-1830210, ONR N000142412278, and the Coca-Cola Foundation. Resources supporting this work were provided by the NASA Center for Climate Simulation (NCCS) at Goddard Space Flight Center, in particular their Prism GPU cluster. The Python code used to train these neural networks is published on GitHub and Zenodo ( https://github.com/ mrepasky3/topo_sr_schrodinger/ ) with code adapted from the I2SB repository ( https: //github.com/NVlabs/I2SB , Liu et al. (2023)), the DiT repository ( https://github.com/ facebookresearch/DiT , Peebles and Xie (2023)), the guided diffusion repository ( https:// 

23 github.com/openai/guided-diffusion , Dhariwal and Nichol (2021)), the latent diffusion repository ( https://github.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion , Rombach et al. (2022)), and the taming transformers repository ( https://github.com/CompVis/taming-transformers ,Esser et al. (2021)). 

# Contributions 

All authors contributed equally. MR wrote the first draft. All the co-authors edited the manuscript. 

Software CGAL version 5.6.0 (Rineau et al., 2024), Shadowspy version 0.1.0 (Bertone, 2024), python-flux (Potter et al., 2023), xarray version 2024.01.1 (Hoyer and Hamman, 2017; Hoyer et al., 2024), Matplotlib version 3.8.2 (Hunter, 2007; The Matplotlib Development Team, 2023), PyTorch version 2.1.2 (Paszke et al., 2019), CUDA version 11.8 (Farber, 2011), Torch image models version 0.9.16 (Wightman, 2019) 

# A Deep Learning & Function Approximation 

Many modern generative models use U-Nets (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to approximate 

uθt (the neural network weights), e.g., for diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020), normalizing flows (Lipman et al., 2023), and SBs (Liu et al., 2023). U-Nets are a type of convolutional neural network (CNN) with residual connections (He et al., 2016), meaning intermediate data embeddings are transmitted across layers of the network. CNNs repeatedly apply convolutional filters, which are typically small kernels (e.g., 3 × 3 or 5 × 5) with learnable components. After each layer, the spatial dimensions of input tensor data are downsampled or upsampled; U-Nets are a particular type of CNN that first downsample input data to a small spatial resolution (the encoding arm), followed by successive layers to re-size data (the decoding arm) to the original shape supplied to the encoding arm. Recent improvements include adaptive normalization (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021) and attention (Vaswani et al., 2017; Ho et al., 2020). Time-dependence is encoded using the sinusoidal embedding from transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). More recently, vision transformers (ViTs) have challenged U-Nets as powerful backbones for generative modeling (Peebles and Xie, 2023; Esser et al., 2024). Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) introduced ViTs by applying the attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) to patched tensor data. That is, an input tensor of shape C × H × W is “patchified” along the spatial dimensions ( H and W ) to yield L := HW/P 2 number of sub-tensor patches of shape C ×

P × P . Using convolutional layers, patches are embedded into vectors of size D, and the vectorized patches are unrolled into a sequence of shape L×D. The sequence is then input to 

M subsequent transformer blocks, each block applying multi-head attention. See Figure 2(c) for a visualization of ViT input and architecture. Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) adapt ViTs for diffusion modeling (Peebles and Xie, 2023). DiTs are modified ViTs, which include conditioning, facilitating time-dependence, and con-sideration of contextual information. Since the score functions in diffusion and SBs depend on “time”, effective generative modeling requires time-dependent neural networks. Moreover, 24 dependence upon general conditional information y can help constrain the generative process given context (that is, the score uθt (xt, y ) can depend on y). To this end, DiTs incorporates an adaptive layer norm (Perez et al., 2018), which derives “neural network layer re-scaling parameters” from embeddings of time t and conditional information y. In this work, we refer to ViTs and DiTs (which depend on conditional information) interchangeably. Training generative models in high-dimensional settings (matrices and tensors) can be computationally expensive. Latent generative models (Rombach et al., 2022) alleviate this issue by learning the generative process in the latent space of an autoencoder. Autoencoders are encoding/decoding neural networks which embed and decode high-dimensional data to and from a lower-dimensional latent space using learned compressive/decompressive map-pings. For generative modeling, this neural network is trained before training the generative model neural network. In Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling, 2014), the latent space is a low-dimensional Gaussian mixture distribution, and the projection into this space is learned by the encoder network. The decoder network reconstructs the original input data from its latent code. Provided a trained VAE, latent generative models learn a generative process in the latent space, such that generated latent codes can be decoded by the VAE into synthesized samples (Rombach et al., 2022). See Figure 2(d) for a demonstra-tion of generative modeling in the latent space of a VAE. VAEs used in generative models are typically residual CNNs that downsample tensor inputs. 

# B Variational Autoencoder Details 

In this section, we outline the optimization problem pertaining to the training of VAE neural network encoder/decoder Eϕ/Dϕ parameterized by ϕ. The first term of the VAE objective is a “perceptual” term Lrec (Zhang et al., 2018) based upon a comparison between neural network embeddings of the input x and reconstruction ˜ x := D(E(x)). An adversarial term Ladv is defined (Esser et al., 2021) such that a discriminator Dψ (parameterized by ψ) is optimized alongside Eϕ/Dϕ to assess the quality of the reconstruction ˜ x. Following Kingma and Welling (2014), we regularize the distribution of the latent space representation z := Eϕ(x) using a Kullback-Leibler divergence penalty Lreg between the latent space distribution and the standard normal distribution. The full objective has the following general form: 

LVAE = min  

> ϕ

max 

> ψ

 Lrec (x, ˜x) − Ladv (˜ x) + log Dψ(x) + ρKL Lreg (z) , (15) where ρKL = 10 −6 is the regularization weight following Rombach et al. (2022). Each network is composed of 4 successive layers, each of which consists of 2 residual CNN blocks followed by 12 × downsampling or 2 × upsampling of the spatial dimensions. The input is a “tensor” of 1 channel (i.e., a 1 × 96 × 96 matrix), and the subsequent layers yield tensors of 128, 256, and 256 channels. That is, the shape of the embedded data after each layer of the encoder is 128 × 48 × 48, 256 × 24 × 24, and 256 × 12 × 12. This is followed by a residual CNN block, self-attention, and another residual CNN block, maintaining the spatial size and number of channels. Finally, a convolution is applied to yield a representation including only 4 channels: 4 × 12 × 12. The decoder is similarly structured, replacing downsampling with upsampling. The resultant combined encoder/decoder network consists of ∼21 million 25 parameters. Following (Rombach et al., 2022), the adversarial network Dψ is defined by a convolutional neural network of 3 layers, consisting of approximately 2.8 million parameters. In the modeling described in Section 2, the VAE and discriminator are optimized numer-ically using an empirical form of Equation 15. This is conducted in an alternating manner, where each network is optimized alternatively for 5 iterations each. However, for the param-eters of the discriminator are fixed (at the random initialization) for the 5,000 iterations, to “warm start” the parameters of the VAE encoder/decoder. 

# C Schr¨ odinger Bridge Vision Transformer Architecture 

In each time step of the SB generative process, the main body of the ViT takes a latent-space tensor of shape 4 × 12 × 12 as input; the output is used to construct the latent space tensor in the next time step. This tensor is split into 36 patches of size 4 × 2 × 2, each of which are embedded as vectors to yield a length-36 sequence of length-768 vectors. This sequence is passed through 6 transformer blocks with 12 attention heads per block; this is represented by the middle series of ViT blocks in Figure 5. In each transformer block, conditional information in the form of a length-768 vector (see the next paragraph) is infused using adaptive layer normalization (Peebles and Xie, 2023). Three sources of conditional information are encoded as context into a single length-768 vector embedding. The process of encoding contextual information is described below. 

Time step Context: The time step t of the generative process is encoded using transformer position embeddings (Vaswani et al., 2017) into a length-768 vector. 

Image Set Context: Each image is passed through a convolutional encoder with the same architecture as that of the VAE encoder (see Appendix B), yielding a tensor embedding of shape 4 × 12 × 12 for each image (bottom left of Figure 5). The set of image embeddings are averaged along each pixel to yield a single 4 × 12 × 12 embedding for the entire set. Then, this tensor is patchified into 36 non-overlapping patches, each of size 4 × 2 × 2, which are embedded as a length-36 sequence of length-768 vectors. This sequence is input to 6 subsequent transformer blocks with 12 attention heads per block to finally yield a single length-768 vector representation for the image set (bottom center of Figure 5). 

Low-Resolution Topography Context: The low-resolution DEM patch xT is patchified into 9 patches of shape 2 × 2 pixels which are then encoded into a length-9 sequence of length-768 vectors. This sequence is passed through 6 transformer blocks of 12 attention heads each, again yielding a single length-768 vector (left side of Figure 5). These three length-768 vector embeddings (time, images, and a priori ) are summed along each pixel to yield a single length-768 vector containing all conditional information (i.e., the “context”). 26 References 

O. Alexandrov and R. A. Beyer. Multiview shape-from-shading for planetary images. Earth and Space Science , 5(10):652–666, 2018. B. D. Anderson. Reverse-time diffusion equation models. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 12(3):313–326, 1982. S. Anwar, S. Khan, and N. Barnes. A deep journey into super-resolution: A survey. ACM computing surveys (CSUR) , 53(3):1–34, 2020. M. K. Barker, E. Mazarico, G. Neumann, M. Zuber, J. Haruyama, and D. Smith. A new lunar digital elevation model from the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter and SELENE Terrain Camera. Icarus , 273:346–355, 2016. M. K. Barker, E. Mazarico, G. A. Neumann, D. E. Smith, M. T. Zuber, and J. W. Head. Improved LOLA elevation maps for south pole landing sites: Error estimates and their impact on illumination conditions. Planetary and Space Science , 203:105119, 2021. M. K. Barker, E. Mazarico, G. A. Neumann, D. E. Smith, M. T. Zuber, J. W. Head, and X. Sun. A new view of the lunar south pole from the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA). The Planetary Science Journal , 4(9):183–219, 2023. M. K. Barker, E. Mazarico, G. A. Neumann, D. E. Smith, M. T. Zuber, J. W. Head, and X. Sun. Large-scale roughness properties of the lunar north and south polar regions as measured by the lunar orbiter laser altimeter (lola). The Planetary Science Journal , 6(4): 83, 2025. S. Bertone. ShadowSpy v0.1.0 [Software]. Zenodo , 2024. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.14018762. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14018762 .R. A. Beyer, O. Alexandrov, and S. McMichael. The Ames Stereo Pipeline: NASA’s open source software for deriving and processing terrain data. Earth and Space Science , 5(9): 537–548, 2018. K. F. Caluya and A. Halder. Wasserstein proximal algorithms for the Schr¨ odinger bridge problem: Density control with nonlinear drift. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control ,67(3):1163–1178, 2021. T. Chen, G.-H. Liu, and E. A. Theodorou. Likelihood training of Schr¨ odinger bridge using forward-backward SDEs theory. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. H. Chung, J. Kim, M. T. Mccann, M. L. Klasky, and J. C. Ye. Diffusion posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. V. De Bortoli, J. Thornton, J. Heng, and A. Doucet. Diffusion Schr¨ odinger bridge with ap-plications to score-based generative modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:17695–17709, 2021. 27 J. I. Delgado-Centeno, P. Harder, V. Bickel, B. Moseley, F. Kalaitzis, S. Ganju, and M. A. Olivares-Mendez. Superresolution of lunar satellite images for enhanced robotic traverse planning: Maximizing the value of existing data products for space robotics. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , 31(2), 2023. P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021. A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. De-hghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Trans-formers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2021. P. Esser, R. Rombach, and B. Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 12873–12883, 2021. P. Esser, S. Kulal, A. Blattmann, R. Entezari, J. M¨ uller, H. Saini, Y. Levi, D. Lorenz, A. Sauer, F. Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. R. Farber. CUDA application design and development . Elsevier, 2011. I. Fernandes and K. Mosegaard. High-resolution topography from planetary images and laser altimetry. Planetary and Space Science , 218:105514–105526, 2022. I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014. K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. A. M. Heintz, M. Peck, and I. Mackey. Multiscale super-resolution remote imaging via deep conditional normalizing flows. Journal of Aerospace Information Systems , 20(8):473–488, 2023. M. Henriksen, M. Manheim, K. Burns, P. Seymour, E. Speyerer, A. Deran, A. Boyd, E. Howington-Kraus, M. R. Rosiek, B. A. Archinal, et al. Extracting accurate and precise topography from lroc narrow angle camera stereo observations. Icarus , 283:122–137, 2017. M. Heusel, H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, B. Nessler, and S. Hochreiter. GANs trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local Nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. 28 S. Hoyer and J. Hamman. xarray: N-D labeled arrays and datasets in Python. Journal of Open Research Software , 5(1), 2017. doi: 10.5334/jors.148. URL https://doi.org/10. 5334/jors.148 .S. Hoyer, M. Roos, H. Joseph, J. Magin, D. Cherian, C. Fitzgerald, M. Hauser, K. Fujii, F. Maussion, G. Imperiale, S. Clark, A. Kleeman, T. Nicholas, T. Kluyver, J. Westling, J. Munroe, A. Amici, A. Barghini, A. Banihirwe, R. Bell, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, R. Aber-nathey, B. Bovy, J. Omotani, K. M¨ uhlbauer, M. K. Roszko, and P. J. Wolfram. xar-ray v2024.01.1 [Software]. Zenodo , Jan. 2024. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.10558510. URL 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10558510 .W. Hu, L. Ju, Y. Du, and Y. Li. A super-resolution reconstruction model for remote sensing image based on generative adversarial networks. Remote Sensing , 16(8):1460, 2024. J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering ,9(3):90–95, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55. S. Illarionova, D. Shadrin, I. Shukhratov, K. Evteeva, G. Popandopulo, N. Sotiriadi, I. Os-eledets, and E. Burnaev. Benchmark for building segmentation on up-scaled Sentinel-2 imagery. Remote Sensing , 15(9):2347, 2023. D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. D. P. Kingma and M. Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2014. F. G. Lemoine, S. Goossens, T. J. Sabaka, J. B. Nicholas, E. Mazarico, D. D. Rowlands, B. D. Loomis, D. S. Chinn, G. A. Neumann, D. E. Smith, and M. T. Zuber. GRGM900C: A de-gree 900 lunar gravity model from GRAIL primary and extended mission data. Geophysical Research Letters , 41(10):3382–3389, 2014. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL060027. URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2014GL060027 .C. L´ eonard. A survey of the Schr¨ odinger problem and some of its connections with optimal transport. Discrete and continuous dynamical systems , 34(4):1533–1574, 2014. doi: 10. 3934/dcds.2014.34.1533. Y. Lipman, R. T. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. G.-H. Liu, A. Vahdat, D.-A. Huang, E. A. Theodorou, W. Nie, and A. Anandkumar. I2SB: Image-to-image Schr¨ odinger bridge. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2023. I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2019. E. Mazarico, G. Neumann, D. Smith, M. Zuber, and M. Torrence. Illumination conditions of the lunar polar regions using lola topography. Icarus , 211(2):1066–1081, 2011. 29 E. Mazarico, M. K. Barker, and J. B. Nicholas. Advanced illumination modeling for data analysis and calibration. application to the moon. Advances in Space Research , 62(11): 3214–3228, 2018. K. Nasrollahi and T. B. Moeslund. Super-resolution: a comprehensive survey. Machine vision and applications , 25:1423–1468, 2014. A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. M. Pavon and A. Wakolbinger. On free energy, stochastic control, and Schr¨ odinger pro-cesses. In Modeling, Estimation and Control of Systems with Uncertainty: Proceedings of a Conference held in Sopron, Hungary , pages 334–348. Springer, 1991. W. Peebles and S. Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 4195–4205, 2023. E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , 2018. S. F. Potter, S. Bertone, N. Sch¨ orghofer, and E. Mazarico. Fast hierarchical low-rank view factor matrices for thermal irradiance on planetary surfaces. Journal of Computational Physics: X , 17:100130, 2023. L. Rineau, A. Fabri, S. Loriot, Mael, M. GIMENO, J. Tournois, S. Giraudot, G. Damiand, C. Jamin, E. Berberich, M. Teillaud, E. Fogel, M. Hoffmann, M. Glisse, D. Russel, D. ANISIMOV, ilkeryaz, P. Cheilaris, J. Campolattaro, L. Zhu, I. Iordanov, A. PELLE, gaertn, K. Katrioplas, P. Moeller, O. Devillers, G. Bathgate, K. Huang, albert github, and S. Oesau. CGAL v5.6.1 [Software]. Zenodo , Feb. 2024. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.10722676. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10722676 .M. Robinson, S. Brylow, M. e. Tschimmel, D. Humm, S. Lawrence, P. Thomas, B. W. Denevi, E. Bowman-Cisneros, J. Zerr, M. Ravine, et al. Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) instrument overview. Space science reviews , 150:81–124, 2010. M. Robinson, P. Mahanti, L. Carter, B. Denevi, N. Estes, M. Ravine, E. Speyerer, and R. Wagner. ShadowCam—seeing in the dark. In Proceedings of the European Planetary Science Congress, Riga, Latvia , pages 17–22, 2017. R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022. O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention– MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, pro-ceedings, part III 18 , pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. 30 C. Saharia, W. Chan, H. Chang, C. Lee, J. Ho, T. Salimans, D. Fleet, and M. Norouzi. Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 conference proceed-ings , pages 1–10, 2022a. C. Saharia, J. Ho, W. Chan, T. Salimans, D. J. Fleet, and M. Norouzi. Image super-resolution via iterative refinement. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,45(4):4713–4726, 2022b. E. Schr¨ odinger. Sur la th´ eorie relativiste de l’´ electron et l’interpr´ etation de la m´ ecanique quantique. Annales de l’institut Henri Poincar´ e, 2(4):269–310, 1932. Y. Song and S. Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1–9, 2015. Y. Tao, S. J. Conway, J.-P. Muller, A. R. Putri, N. Thomas, and G. Cremonese. Single image super-resolution restoration of TGO CaSSIS colour images: Demonstration with Perseverance rover landing site and Mars science targets. Remote sensing , 13(9):1777, 2021a. Y. Tao, J.-P. Muller, S. Xiong, and S. J. Conway. MADNet 2.0: Pixel-scale topography retrieval from single-view orbital imagery of Mars using deep learning. Remote Sensing ,13(21):4220, 2021b. Y. Tao, S. Xiong, J.-P. Muller, G. Michael, S. J. Conway, G. Paar, G. Cremonese, and N. Thomas. Subpixel-scale topography retrieval of Mars using single-image DTM estima-tion and super-resolution restoration. Remote Sensing , 14(2):257, 2022. The Matplotlib Development Team. Matplotlib v3.8.2 [Software]. Zenodo , Nov. 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.10150955. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10150955 .F. Vargas, P. Thodoroff, A. Lamacraft, and N. Lawrence. Solving Schr¨ odinger bridges via maximum likelihood. Entropy , 23(9):1134, 2021. A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 30, 2017. P. Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural computation , 23(7):1661–1674, 2011. 31 G. Wang, Y. Jiao, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, and C. Yang. Deep generative learning via Schr¨ odinger bridge. In International conference on machine learning , pages 10794–10804. PMLR, 2021. R. Wightman. PyTorch image models v0.9.16 [Software]. Zenodo , 2019. doi: 10.5281/ zenodo.4414861. URL https://github.com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models .R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 586–595, 2018. 32